Wake up!
Wake up!Wake up!
It’s a lovely day.
Oh! Please get up
And come and play.
It’s much too late to lie in bed,
So hurry up, you sleepy head.
Wash and dress
And come on out –
Everyone is up and about.
The cow, the horses, the ducks
And the sheep,
The tiniest chicken
Cheep-cheep-cheep
Wake up!
– C. Fletcher
New words : lovely, buzzing, sleepy head, tiniest; 
 
Neha’s Alarm Clock
Narrator: This alarm clock always rings at six and pulls me out of the bed! It’s so unfair...Oh, how I would love to sleep a little longer in the morning! I wish this clock would forget its job sometimes.
Neha: Oh! My clock has fallen. How happy I am! Tomorrow I can get up late.
Narrator: Ring! Ring! Ring! Off goes the alarm clock at six in the morning. Neha makes a face and covering her ears with a pillow, snuggles under the warm blanket. But she knows she has to get up. She mutters to herself.
Narrator: Something falls. Neha smiles. Next morning there is no alarm. So Neha sleeps and sleeps. The small chirpy birds which come to the window sill every morning find Neha still sleeping.
Neha: Oh, no! If it’s not the alarm clock, it’s these birds… why don’t they leave me alone?
Narrator: Even this wish of Neha’s comes true. The next morning there is not only no alarm clock, there are no birds either. But there is someone else who does not want her to miss the school bus. Can you guess who it is? The big bright Sun! He fills Neha’s room with a warm smile.
Sun: Wake up dear! Wake up fast!
Neha: Oh, my eyes! Now it’s the Sun waking me up! Why can’t he let me be?
Narrator: Even this wish of Neha’s comes true. Next morning the Sun is behind the clouds. So, Neha snores till she hears her mother’s voice...
Mother: Wake up, sleepy head. You will miss the bus.
Neha: Oh no! Why does mother have to wake me up?
Narrator: There is no escape now. Neha gets up and gets ready. Can you imagine what happens the next day? Neha wakes up with a start. Her watch says it is six o’clock. She calls out to her mother.
Neha: Ma, who woke me up today?
Mother: Who else? You, of course!
Neha: But, I was sleeping, how could I …?
Mother: Now, tell me, why do you eat your lunch every day at one in the afternoon?
Neha: I feel hungry.
Mother: Why do you sleep at nine every night?
Neha: Because I feel sleepy.
Mother: There is a clock inside you which tells you when to eat, when to sleep and when to wake up.
Neha: Oh! Ooh! I better rush now. I don’t want to miss the bus.
Mother: RELAX! Today is Sunday!
Neha: Oh! Oh! Oh!
– Adapted from Neha’s Alarm Clock
by Girija Rani Asthana
New words : snuggles, mutters, window sill, relax;

Noses 
I looked in the mirror
and looked at my nose:
it’s the funniest thing,
the way it grows
stuck right out where all of it shows
with two little holes where the
breathing goes.

I looked in the mirror
and saw in there
the end of my chin
and the start of my hair
and between there
isn’t much space to spare with my nose,
like a handle, sticking there.

If ever you want
to giggle and shout
and can’t think of what
to do it about,
just look in the mirror and then, no doubt,
you’ll see how funny YOUR nose
sticks out!
– Aileen Fisher
New words: mirror, funniest, breathing, sticking, giggle;

The Little Fir Tree
The sad fir tree had leaves like needles and no birds ever made their nests on it. So it said, “I wish I had green leaves like my other friends.”
Next morning, its wish was granted. Soon a goat came along and ate all the green leaves. “Oh! dear,” said the fir tree. “I wish I had gold leaves as goats do not eat gold leaves.”
When the little fir tree woke up the next morning, it was surprised to see gold leaves. “How happy I am!” it said.
Two men came along and stole the gold leaves.
“I wish I had glass leaves instead. Men do not steal glass leaves.”
The next day its glass leaves shone in the bright sun. “How happy I am!” it said.
At night the wind blew whoo...oo...oo. All the glass leaves broke.
“Oh dear!” said the fir tree. I like my old needle-like leaves best, for goats do not eat them. No man can steal them. The wind will do them no harm.”
The tree went to sleep. When it woke up the next morning, it had all its needles back again.
“Oh! I never was so happy,” said the little fir tree.
New words: pretty, needles, leaves, gold, stole;

Run!
AWAY from the city
And into the sun,
Out to the country,
Run!  Run!  Run!

Run in the raindrops!
Run ’neath the trees!
Run little races
With each little breeze!

Run down the hillside,
Run up the lane;
Run through the meadow,
Then run back again!

Run and be merry
All through the day!
Run to the country,
Away! Away!
– Mary Daunt
New words: raindrops, ’neath (beneath), breeze, hillside, meadow, merry;

Nasruddin's Aim

One day, Nasruddin was chatting with his friends.
He began to boast, “No one can match my skill in archery.
I string the bow, take aim, and shoot the arrow...
Wh...o...o...sh.
The arrow is sure to hit right on target.”
Hearing this, one of his friends immediately brought a bow and some arrows.
Giving them to Nasruddin, he said, “Here,  Nasruddin! Take this bow and arrows.”
Then pointing towards a target, he said, “Aim at that target and shoot an arrow.”
Nasruddin held the bow in his hands, strung it, aimed at the target and shot an arrow.
Wh...o...o...o...o...
The arrow didn’t hit the target! Instead, it fell down somewhere in the middle.
“Ha...ha...ha...ha...”
His friends started laughing. They said, “Hey, Nasruddin! Is this your best aim?”
“Oh, no! Not at all,” said Nasruddin, defending himself.
“This wasn’t my aim. It was Azad’s aim. I just showed you how Azad shoots an arrow.”
Saying this, Nasruddin picked up another arrow. Once again, he strung the bow, aimed at the target, and shot the arrow. This time, the arrow fell a little further from where it had fallen before.
But it certainly didn’t hit the target!
They asked Nasruddin, “And this must be how you shoot an arrow!”
“Of course not,” argued Nasruddin. “Even this aim was not mine. It was the chief guard’s aim.”
Now somebody remarked, “Well... Now who’s next on the list?”
Hearing this, all the friends burst out laughing.
Nasruddin didn’t say a word. He quietly picked up one more arrow. And again...
And this time Nasruddin was really lucky! The arrow hit right on the target!
Everybody stared at Nasruddin, their mouths agape in amazement. Before anyone could say anything, Nasruddin said triumphantly, “Did you see that? It was my aim!”

New words: chatting, archery, string, target, defending, amazement, triumphantly;


Why?

I know a curious little boy,
Who is always asking “Why?”
Why this, why that, why then, why now?
Why not, why by-the-by?

He wants to know why wood should swim,
Why lead and marble sink,
Why sun should shine and wind should blow
And why we eat and drink.

He wants to know what makes the clouds
And why they cross the sky,
Why sinks the sun behind the hills
And why the flowers die.

Some of these why’s are not too hard
To answer if you’ll try;
Others no one ever yet
Has found the reason why.

New words : curious, lead, marble, sink, reason;

The Man in an Onion Bed
I met a man in an onion bed.
He was crying so hard his eyes were red.
And the tears rolled off the end of his nose
As he ate his way down the onion rows.

He ate and he cried, but for all his tears
He sang, “Sweet onions, oh my dears!
I love you, I do and you love me,
But you make me as sad as a man can be.”

— John Ciardi;


Alice in Wonderland
One day, Alice was lying under a tree listening to her sister reading a story.
Suddenly, she saw a white rabbit scamper by. He had pink eyes and was wearing a blue coat. He took out a big watch from his waistcoat pocket and as he hurried away, he said, “Oh dear, I will be too late!”
She thought there was something very different about this rabbit. It could talk, it wore a red waistcoat, and it carried a watch. Alice was burning with curiosity and she followed the white rabbit.
The rabbit started running and Alice followed the rabbit. The rabbit suddenly popped down a large rabbit hole. Alice jumped into the rabbit hole too! The rabbit went down and down and down and down into the rabbit hole.
Alice said aloud, “Where am I? How many miles down have I fallen? I must be getting somewhere near the center of the earth.” She wondered, “Will I slip through the earth to the other side?”
Thump! Alice landed on a pile of dry leaves. She looked around quickly and suddenly saw the white rabbit again. It disappeared saying, “Oh, my ears and whiskers! How late it’s getting!”
Alice stood up and saw a small door about fifteen inches high. It was too small for her to go through. She saw a glass table with a golden key on it. She tried the little golden key in the lock and to her delight it fitted!
Alice opened the door and looked into the loveliest garden she had ever seen! How she longed to be among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains! But she could not even get her head through the doorway.
“Oh! How I wish, I could become smaller!” she exclaimed loudly.

— Adapted from Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll

New words: scamper, hurried, popped, disappeared, whiskers;	

Don’t be Afraid of the Dark
Don’t be afraid of the dark, little one,
The earth must rest when the day is done.
The sun must be harsh, but moonlight – never!
And those stars will be shining forever and ever,
Be friends with the Night, there is nothing to fear,
Just let your thoughts travel to friends far and near.
By day, it does seem that our troubles won’t cease,
But at night, late at night, the world is at peace.
New words: afraid, dark, rest, harsh, forever, troubles, cease

– Ruskin Bond
New words: afraid, dark, rest, harsh, forever, troubles, cease;

Don’t Give Up

If you keep on going
And never stop,
You can keep on going,
You can make it to the top.
Life is full of mountains,
Some are big and some are small,
But if you don’t give up
You can overcome them all.
So keep on going
Try not to stop,
When you keep on going
You can make it to the top. ;

Helen Keller

It was the summer of 1880. A healthy baby girl was born in a small town in Alabama. Her parents loved her dearly and named her Helen Keller. But one day, the baby became ill and day after day, her fever stayed high. Everyone in the family tried to help her to get better, but all they could say was, “There is nothing more we can do. The baby may not live.”
Helen lived. But she was not the same after her illness. “Something is very wrong,” her mother said. At last, they found out what was wrong. The child could not see or hear.
The baby grew into a little girl. Her parents felt sorry for her. Helen often cried and held on to her mother. “Give the poor child what she wants,” her father would say.
Though Helen could not hear or see, she was a bright little girl. Some people thought Helen could not learn anything. Her mother did not agree. “Helen is very smart,” she said and added, “the problem is, how can we reach her? She is locked up inside herself.”
Helen began to grow wild. She would not let anyone comb her hair. Her clothes were always dirty. She was often angry. Sometimes she even lay on the floor and kicked her feet.
Her parents thought that they should find a teacher for her. Miss Sullivan, a young teacher, agreed to help Helen to learn to see the world. Miss Sullivan gave Helen a doll. “D_O_L_L” spells doll. She spelt the word with her fingers into Helen’s hand. She made the letters with special hand signs. Helen copied her teacher and spelt D_O_L_L too, but she did not understand what she was doing. Helen liked Miss Sullivan. She was strict but kind. She spelt a lot of words for Helen, on her hand, day and night, to make Helen understand.
One day, her teacher made Helen put her hand into running water. Then, she spelt W_A_T_E_R. Suddenly, Helen understood that W_A_T_E_R meant something wet, running over her hand. She understood that words were the most important things in the world. Words would tell her everything she wanted to know.
New words: dearly, illness, agreed, important;
Pretty Peep

I have a little sister,
They call her Pretty Peep;
She wades in the waters
Deep, deep, deep;
She climbs up the mountains
High, high, high;
My pretty little sister,
She has just one eye.

Who is Pretty Peep?
Answer: A star;
______________________________________________________________________________________IV-I
Hiawatha

Hiawatha was a young boy. He lived with his old grandmother, Nokomis, in a wigwam. Nokomis taught Hiawatha about the wonders around them. She told him about the stars, the trees, the insects, the birds, the animals, and many other things.

Hiawatha grew up to love them all. He could talk to the birds and the animals, and they to him.

"Then the little Hiawatha
Learned of every bird its language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How they built their nests in Summer,
Where they hid themselves in Winter,
Talked with them whene’er he met them,
Called them ‘Hiawatha’s chickens.’"
Of all beasts he learned the language,
Learned their names and all their secrets,
How the beavers built their lodges,
Where the squirrels hid their acorns,
How the reindeer ran so swiftly,
Why the rabbit was so timid,
Talked with them whene’er he met them,
Called them ‘Hiawatha’s Brothers’.”
– H.W. Longfellow
New words: wigwam, beavers, acorns, reindeer, timid;


The Scholar’s Mother Tongue

A learned Pundit once visited the court of Akbar. He told the King and his courtiers that he had mastery over many different languages.
The Pundit could speak many languages fluently. He was so fluent that no one could find out what his mother tongue was. He challenged everybody at the court to name his mother tongue.
When everyone failed, the challenge was taken up by Birbal. That night, Birbal went quietly to the Pundit’s room when he was asleep. He whispered into the Pundit’s ear and tickled it with a feather. The Pundit, half awake, cried out suddenly and shouted words in his mother tongue.
Birbal came to the court the next day and told everyone that the Pundit’s mother tongue was Telugu. The Pundit was surprised and accepted the truth. King Akbar then asked Birbal, “How did you find the truth?”
Birbal answered, “In times of difficulty, a person speaks only in his mother tongue.” He also told the King how he had gone to the Pundit’s room at night to find out the truth.

— Adapted from Akbar and Birbal stories;

A Watering Rhyme
Read and learn this poem:

Early in the morning,
Or the evening hour,
Are the times to water
Every kind of flower.

Watering at noonday,
When the sun is high,
Doesn’t help the flowers,
Only makes them die.

Also, when you water,
Water at the roots;
Flowers keep their mouths where
We should wear our boots.

Soak the earth around them,
Then through all the heat
The flowers will have water
For their thirsty ‘feet’!

— P.A. Ropes
New words: hour, watering, noonday, boots, soak, heat;


The Giving Tree
Read the story:
Once there was a tree and it loved a little boy.
Every day the boy would visit the tree and enjoy its company.
When the boy was tired, he slept under the tree. The tree was happy to give its shade.
But time went by. And the boy grew older and went away.
Tree: Come here, my boy. Come and climb up my trunk and swing from my branches.
Boy: Ah, what fun!
Tree: Are you hungry? Eat my apples.
Boy: How delicious!
The tree was often alone. After some years, one day the boy came to the tree and the tree was very happy.
Boy: I am too big to climb and play. I want to buy things and have fun. I want some money.
Tree: I’m sorry but I have no money. I have only leaves and apples. You can pluck my apples and sell them in the market. Then you will have money.
So the boy plucked the apples and sold them in the market. The tree was happy.
But the boy stayed away for a long time and the tree was sad.
One day, the boy came back and the tree shook with joy.
Tree: Come, my boy, come and climb up my trunk and swing from my branches.
Boy: I am too busy to climb trees. I am getting married and I need a house for my wife and children. Can you give me a house?
Tree: I have no house but you may cut off my branches and build a house.
So the boy cut off the tree’s branches and carried them away to build a house. The tree was happy.
But the boy stayed away for a long time and the tree was sad again.
When he came back after some years, the tree was so happy that it could hardly speak.
Tree: Come, Boy, come. What can I do for you?
Boy: I am going on a business trip. I want a boat to take me away. Can you give me a boat?
Tree: All I have left is a trunk. Cut down my trunk and make a boat. Then you can sail away.
So the boy cut the trunk of the tree and sailed away in a boat. The tree was left only with a stump.
After a long time, the boy came back again. Now he was an old man.
Tree: I am sorry, friend, but I have nothing left to give you. My apples are gone.
Old man: My teeth are too weak for apples.
Tree: My branches are gone. You cannot swing on them.
Old man: I am too old to swing on branches.
Tree: My trunk is gone. You cannot climb.
Old man: I am too tired to climb.
Tree: I am sorry. I wish that I could give you something... but I have nothing left. I am just an old stump. I am sorry...
Old man: Dear tree, you have always given. But now I don’t need much—just a quiet place to sit and rest.
Tree: Well, an old stump is good for sitting and resting on. Come, friend, sit down and rest.
The old man did. And the tree was still happy.

— Adapted from ‘The Giving Tree’ by Shel Silverstein

New words: swing, delicious, pluck, trip, sail, stump, recognised;
Chintha Chettu
Chintha Chettu is a tamarind tree.
This famous tamarind tree is in Gwalior.
It grows over Tansen’s tomb.
Tansen was a great singer.
People in Gwalior say:
“Eat the leaves of this tamarind tree
And you’ll also sing like Tansen!”;

The Donkey

Read and enjoy this poem:

If I had a donkey
And he wouldn’t go,
Would I wallop him?
No, no, no.
I’d find a little hay
And give him some corn,
Then he’d be the best donkey
That ever was born.

— Margaret S. Russell;


Books
Read and learn this poem:

“Come in, come in!”
Said the library door;
I opened it wide
And saw books galore!

Tall skinny books
Up high on the shelves;
Little fat books
That stood by themselves.

I opened one up
And sat down to look;
The pictures told stories!
What a wonderful book!

New words: library, wide, galore, skinny, shelves, wonderful;
Going to buy a Book

Let’s read and enjoy:

One day, grandfather gave my brother and me some money.
“Go and buy books,” he said.
We were both very happy. We both love to read.
Should we go now? Should we go later?
Should we go today? Should we go tomorrow?
We decided to go right now.

Should we go to the big market? Should we go to the small shop?
Should we go with somebody? Should we go alone?
We decided to go to the small shop, just the two of us.

We like the small bookshop. It is small but it has many books.
The man in the shop likes us. He always helps us.

Should I buy a book with a lot of pictures?
Should I buy a book with a lot of stories?
Should I buy a thin book?
I could not decide.

We did not know which book to buy.
The man in the shop smiled at us.
“Relax, come with me,” he said.
“These books are about animals.
Those are about machines.
Those over there are about wars.
Take what you want.”

I picked some books. My brother picked some books.
I sat on the floor. He sat on the chair.
And we read and we read and we read.

It was very quiet. There was no sound.
One hour passed. Two hours passed.
Finally, we knew which books to buy.

The man in the bookshop smiled at us.
I got a fat book with many stories.
My brother got a big book with many pictures.
We ran home to our grandfather.
We climbed on his bed.
He put his arms around us and then
We read, and read, and read.

— Rukmini Banerji
New words: alone, bookshop, machines, finally, climbed;

Books are great! Books are fun!

Books let you do what you’ve never done!
Books are great! Books are fun!
Let’s read books, everyone!
Read a good mystery, solve a crime!
Read about history, go back in time!
Read about a lost dog, where can it be?
Read about a giant frog under the sea!
Read a very funny book, tears go away!
Read a bright, sunny book on a rainy day!

— Mash Goldfish (adapted);

The Naughty Boy
Enjoy and learn this poem:

There was a naughty boy,
And a naughty boy was he.
He ran away to Scotland,
The people there to see –

Then he found
That the ground
Was as hard,
That a yard
Was as long,
That a song
Was as merry,

That a cherry
Was as red,
That lead
Was as weighty,
That fourscore
Was as eighty,
That a door was as wooden
As in England—

So he stood in his shoes
And he wondered,
He wondered,
He stood in his shoes,
And he wondered.

— John Keats

New words: naughty, found, ground, merry, cherry, weighty, wooden;


Pinocchio
Once upon a time, an old carpenter bought a very queer piece of wood. As he used his plane on it, he heard a little laughing voice say, “Stop! You’re tickling me.”
The old man was puzzled by the voice. He said, “This is a strange piece of wood. What shall I do with it? I think I’ll make it into a puppet.”
He set to work, and as the puppet boy took shape, the old man said, “He must have a name. I will call him Pinocchio.”
As soon as he finished making the eyes, the carpenter was amazed to see them move. Before the mouth was made, it began to laugh. “Stop laughing!” the old man said.
It did stop, but as soon as his back was turned, it put out its tongue. And its nose grew long.
No sooner were its hands ready than it snatched off the carpenter’s wig and put it on its own head. And then Pinocchio’s nose grew longer.
When its legs and feet were made, they were too stiff to use, so the carpenter showed Pinocchio how to use them.
Now, the carpenter decided to send Pinocchio to school. But there, Pinocchio did nothing but look for fun. He often ran away from school.
“Why don’t you go to school?” asked the carpenter. Pinocchio told him a lie... and his nose started growing longer and longer.
Each time he was rude to someone or told a lie, his nose grew longer. Finally, Pinocchio said, “I’m glad to be a real boy. I’ll never lie again.”
— Adapted from the story of Pinocchio

New words: carpenter, queer, plane, puzzled, puppet, took shape, amazed, stiff, decided

____________________________________________________________________________IV-II
Ice-Cream Man
When summer’s in the city,
And brick’s a blaze of heat,
The Ice-cream Man with his little cart
Goes trundling down the street.
Beneath his round umbrella,
Oh, what a joyful sight,
To see him fill the cones with mounds
Of cooling brown and white:
Vanilla, chocolate, strawberry,
Or chilly things to drink
From bottles full of frosty-fizz,
Green, orange, white, or pink.
His cart might be a flower bed,
Of roses and sweet peas,
The way the children cluster round
As thick as honeybees.
- RACHEL FIELD
New words: 
blaze : bright flame or fire
trundling : moving on small broad wheels
mounds : heap, pile
frosty-fizz : chilled drink making a hissing, bubbling sound
cluster : gather around, group of similar things;

Wonderful Waste!

Once, the Maharaja of Travancore
ordered a grand dinner in his palace. In the
afternoon before the dinner, the Maharaja
entered the kitchen to survey the dishes that
had been prepared for the feast.
“What are you going to do with those
vegetable scraps?” he asked the cook,
pointing to the basket of scraps near the
cook. The cook replied, “They are waste. We
will throw them away.”
“You cannot waste all these bits and
pieces of vegetables. Find a way to use them,”
the Maharaja commanded sternly and

walked away.
The cook was in
a fix and kept
staring at the
vegetable scraps for
some time. Suddenly, an idea flashed across his

mind.
H e t o o k a l l t h e
vegetable bits, washed
them and cleaned them
well.
Then he cut them into
long strips. He put them in
a huge pot and placed it on
the fire to cook. Next, he
g r o u n d s o m e f r e s h
coconut, green chillies and
garlic together. He added
this paste and some salt to the cooking vegetables.
A tempting smell started coming from the pot.
Now he whipped some curd and added it to the curry.
He also poured a few spoonfuls of coconut oil and
decorated the dish with curry leaves.
Lo and behold! The new dish was ready.
The cook served this new dish to the guests that
evening.
Everyone was eager to know the name of
the new dish. The cook thought and
thought. Then a name came to
his mind. He named it avial (uh-vi-ul) avial became famous all
over Kerala and is now one of the dishes in
a traditional Kerala feast. And imagine, it
all came from a basket of waste!
New Phrases:
in a fix : a situation hard to escape from
flash across the mind : suddenly think of
lo and behold : look! what a surprise
traditional feast : hearty meal for many guests served on a special occasion;

Bamboo Curry 

1. One day the mother-in-law of
a Santhal bridegroom cooked
a special dish for him when
he visited her.

2. “This curry is delicious. What
is it?” The mother-in-law
pointed at the bamboo door.

3. Next morning, just as he
was about to leave, he
remembered that there was
no bamboo in his village.

4. So he removed the bamboo
door and carrying it with him
left for his home.

5. On reaching his village, he
told his wife, “Make curry
with this bamboo door.”

6. She was shocked. “How can I
make curry out of a bamboo
door?”

7. “Come, I'll help you by
chopping up the bamboo,” he
said.

8. His wife boiled it and boiled it.
Later when her husband
tasted it he said, “It’s too hard
to eat. You don’t know how
to cook.”

9. His wife added more water and
boiled it and boiled it.
“It’s still too hard. I can’t eat it.”

10. The in-laws came to visit the
young couple that evening.
They all laughed at his

foolishness. The mother-in-
law said, “ Didn’t you know

the curry was made from bamboo shoot
and not from a bamboo door?

(A Santhal folk tale);

Teamwork
Teamwork, teamwork,

Together we can make our dream work.
Then we'll share the joy of what we've done,

Teamwork, everyone!

It's fun to shoot the basketball through the hoop,
But if nobody passes then nobody shoots.
And the relay race just can't go on,
If nobody wants to pass the baton.
We're the parts that make up the whole,
And we've got our eyes on a common goal.
Sometimes it can be a big plus,
When a you or a me becomes an us!
-JAN NIGRO


New Words:
teamwork : combined effort of a group
hoop : (here) wooden or iron ring trundled along by child
passes : move onward
relay race : race between teams of whicheach person does part of thedistance
baton : short tube or stick carried in relay race;

Flying Together

Deep in a forest stood a very tall tree. Its leafy
branches spread out like strong arms.
This tree was the home of a flock of wild geese.
They felt safe there. One of the geese was a wise old
bird.
He noticed a small creeper at the foot of the tree.
He spoke to the other birds about it.
“Do you see that creeper?” he said to them. “Let
us destroy it”. “Why must we destroy it?” asked the
geese in surprise. “It is so small. What harm can it
do?” “My friends,” replied the wise old bird, “that
little creeper will soon grow. As it creeps up this tree,
it will become thick and strong.”
“What of that?” asked the geese. “What harm can
a creeper do us?”
“Don't you see?” replied the wise bird, “with the
help of that creeper, it will be possible for someone to
climb this tree. A hunter can come up and kill us
all.”
“Well there’s no hurry,” they replied, “the creeper is
very small. It would be a pity to destroy it now.”
“Destroy the creeper while it is still young,” the old
bird advised. “Now it is tender and
you can cut it easily. Later it will
become hard and you will
not be able to cut it.”
“We’ll see, we’ll
see,” answered
the birds. But
they did not
destroy the
creeper. .
They forgot
the wise old
bird’s advice. As
the creeper grew, it
began winding its way up
the tree.
Stronger and stronger it became,
until it was as strong as a thick rope.
One morning when the geese had
gone out in search of food, a hunter
came to the forest.
“So this is where the wild geese
live,” he said to himself. “When they
come back in the evening, I shall
catch them.”
The hunter climbed up the
tree with the help of the
creeper. He got to the top and
spread his net there. Then he climbed down and went
away.
In the evening, the geese returned home. They did not
notice the net. As they flew into the tree, they were
trapped. They struggled hard to get out, but could not.
“Help! Help!” cried the geese. “We are caught in the
hunter’s net. Oh! What shall we do?”
“Don’t make a fuss now,” said the wise old bird. “Long ago I told
you to destroy the creeper, but you did not. Now see what has
happened. Tomorrow morning the hunter will come back and kill
us all.”
“We were foolish,” wept the birds. “We are very sorry we did not
listen to you. Please tell us what to do?”
“Then listen carefully,” replied the wise bird. “When the hunter
comes you must all pretend to be dead. Just lie still. The hunter
will not want dead birds. He will throw us to the ground. It will then
be easy for him to climb down, collect the dead birds, and takethem home. When the last of us has
been thrown down, we must quickly
get up and fly away.”
In the morning the hunter came to the
tree and climbed up. He looked at the
geese in the net.
“They are all dead,” he muttered to himself.
He threw them out of the net one by one. The birds lay
still until the last one had been thrown down. Then, all
at once, they got up, flapped their wings, and flew away.
The hunter was taken by surprise. From the top of the
tree he watched all the geese fly away.

-SHIV KUMAR
(Adapted from Stories from
Panchatantra – ‘A wise old bird’)
New Words: 
geese : plural for goose; large web-footed bird
creeper : plant that needs support to grow, usually along a wall or a tree
winding : go in circular, spiral course
muttered : spoken in a low tone
flapped : move wings up and down;

My Shadow
I have a little shadow that goes

in and out with me.
And what can be the use of him is
more than I can see.
He is very, very like me from the
heels up to the head;

And I see him jump before me,

When I jump into my bed.
The funniest thing about him is the way
he likes to grow
Not at all like proper children, which is
always very slow;
For he sometimes shoots up taller like an
India-rubber ball,
And he sometimes gets so little that
There's none of him at all.
One morning, very early, before the
sun I was up,
I rose and found the shining dew
on every buttercup;
But my lazy little shadow, like an
arrant sleepyhead.
Had stayed at home behind me and was
Fast asleep in bed.
-ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON
New Words:

India-rubber ball : a ball that can bounce
very high
buttercup : a yellow flower
arrant : bad
arrant sleepyhead : completely inattentive;


Robinson Crusoe Discovers a Footprint
One day, when I was going towards my boat, I was
surprised to see the footprint of a man on the sand. I
stood amazed! I listened; I looked around me; I could
neither hear nor see anything. I went up higher to look
down; I went up the shore and down the shore, but it was
no good; I could find no other footprint but that one. I
went to it again to see if there were any more footprints
and to tell if it had been my imagination. But I was not
mistaken, for there was exactly the print of a foot — toes,
heel, every part of a foot. I could not imagine
how it came there.
I stayed a long time thinking, but
became more and more confused.
Read and enjoy the poem At last I returned home very frightened, looking behind
me after every two or three steps, mistaking every bush
and tree to be a man.
When I came to my cave (which I called my castle), I
ran inside it, as if I was being chased. I do not remember
whether I used the ladder or went in by the hole in the
rock, which I called the door. I ran for cover, faster than

any animal could run.
I did not sleep that night. The more I thought about
what I had seen, the more afraid I became. I thought it
could be one of the savages of the mainland who had
wandered out to the sea, in a small boat.
Luckily I was not on shore at that time, but what if he
had seen my boat! If he had seen the boat he would have
realised that someone lived on the island and would soon
return with others to kill and eat me.
And so I lay fearful for many days and prayed for
protection. In doing so, I was much comforted and began
going out to investigate. But even now as I went forward, I
looked behind me frequently, because I was still
very frightened. However, as I went about for two or three days and
saw nothing I became a little bolder. I decided to go down
to the shore again and examine the footprint once more. I
decided to measure it with my own footmark.
As I came closer to the footprint, I realised that it could
not be my footprint because I had not come to this part of
the beach since a long time. Secondly, as I placed my foot
alongside that footprint, it seemed larger than my own.
My fear returned! I went home again, believing that
there was someone there.
The island was inhabited!

(Adapted from Daniel Defoe s’ Robinson Crusoe)
New Words:

savages : wild people in primitive state
mainland : large continuous extent of land
wandered : go from place to place without a definite route
bolder : more confident
inhabited : occupied, dwelled in ;

Crying
Crying only a little bit
is no use. You must cry
until your pillow is soaked!
Then you can jump in the shower
and splash-splash-splash!
Then you can throw open
your window
and, “Ha, ha! ha ha!”
And if people say, “Hey,
what's going on up there?”
“Ha ha!” sing back, “Happiness
was hiding in the last tear!
I wept it! Ha ha!”

-GALWAY KINNELL
New Words: 
soaked : completely wet
shower : bath in which water is sprayed
from above
wept : shed tears, cried;


My Elder Brother


SCENE 1
A hostel room. Two brothers aged 9 and 14 years, sitting at a study table. The elder brother, Bhaiya, is reading a book and the younger one, Munna, is drawing pictures of birds and animals.

BHAIYA
What are you doing, Munna?

MUNNA
I am drawing.

BHAIYA
When will you study? Where were you in the morning?

MUNNA
I was playing. Bhaiya, how can you sit with a book for hours together?

BHAIYA
That's because I want my foundation in education to be very strong. If the base is strong, then the building will stand firmly. Sometimes it takes me two years to do one year's work.

MUNNA
Bhaiya, you are five years older than I am and three classes ahead of me. I wonder why you keep writing the same word twenty times, one sentence more than twenty times, and copy poems several times in beautiful letters?

BHAIYA
You know, studying English is no child's play. One has to work very hard in order to learn the subject. To speak or write English properly, tremendous effort is required. But the moment you get a chance, you run to the field, play marbles, fly paper kites, or sit idling away with friends for fun! Can’t you sit down and study?

MUNNA
(turning pale)
Oh Bhaiya, there is a big mela in the village today. Should we go?

BHAIYA
Have you ever seen me going to a fair or watching a cricket or hockey match? I don't go near them. I prefer to study a book. I don't mind repeating a class for more than two years. But you might stay in the same class all your life. Do you expect to pass if you waste your time playing all the time? You are simply wasting father's hard-earned money.

MUNNA
Bhaiya, I feel like running away and going back home.
(Munna starts crying; sobbing sounds "wah, wah, bah, bah, hu, hu" are heard.)

BHAIYA
Now, now! Stop crying. Put on a nice smile. Look, I will make a timetable for you to follow. Get up at dawn.

Time Schedule

6 AM: Wash your hands
6-8 AM: English
8-9 AM: Maths
9-9:30 AM: History
3:30 PM: Off to school
5-6 PM: Grammar
6:30-7 PM: English composition
8-9 PM: Translation
9-10 PM: Hindi
10-11 PM: Other subjects, then to bed
MUNNA
But when is the time to play?

BHAIYA
Play? What is the need, Munna?

MUNNA
Oh! I love the green fields, the gentle breeze. I want to jump up like a football! I like the touch-and-go and the sounds of the hu tu tu and the hurry and flurry of volleyball. It pulls me like a magnet. As soon as I am on the field, I forget everything.

BHAIYA
Alas! I have failed once again.

MUNNA
Oh! But Bhaiya, I have passed and topped my class. Now there is only two years difference between us.

BHAIYA
But my dear brother, don't be so proud. You have passed only one class and you think that I'm stupid and you are smart. Once in a while, in a game, you might get lucky and hit a goal, but that does not mean you have mastered the game. You have to work hard to be successful in life. When you have to study a subject like Algebra or Geometry in higher classes, then you will understand the importance of hard work.

In Geometry, if one writes ‘acb’ instead of ‘abc,’ the answer is marked wrong. The examiners will not spare you. They want you to learn word by word from the textbooks.

MUNNA
Oh, Bhaisaheb! This is scary. I don’t think I want to go to the 9th class now, but I will still complete my day’s homework so that I get no punishment in class. Just today, we were asked to write a short essay on the topic of Punctuality in four pages! And imagine, can something be written on four pages and still be short? It’s all so mixed up! Thank God, it was time for school, or else, the scolding would have gone on and on.

MUNNA
(thinking aloud)
Ah! I am lucky. I can pass easily. I need not study so hard. Now I can play games with my friends and fly kites. But I should still be careful that Bhaiya does not see me flying kites.

SCENE 2
The final exams are over and the results are out.

MUNNA
(talking aloud)
The results were out once again and it so happened that I passed, and Bhaiya failed again. Bhaiya was really upset. I was also sad seeing my brother so unhappy. Bhaiya now became gentler with me. I, in turn, became naughtier and studied even less than before.

(One day a kite is flying slowly downwards. Munna starts running in order to grab it. Suddenly, he comes face to face with Bhaiya.)

BHAIYA
Aren't you ashamed to be playing kites all day long? Don't you realize that now you are in the eighth class and not studying in a lower class? If you think that I am just one class ahead of you and I can't say anything, you are wrong. I am five years older than you are and will always be. Understanding doesn’t come only from reading books. Look at Ma and Baba. Ma has never gone to school and Baba has only passed the fifth class.

MUNNA
Really Bhaiya! Is that true?

BHAIYA
Yes! There are a thousand things that they know more than you or me. And even if we have studied the wisdom of the whole world, Ma and Baba will always have the right to explain to us and correct us. Now, what would you do if I were to fall sick today?

MUNNA
I don't know, Bhaiya! I would tell Baba and he would rush to the hostel.

BHAIYA
Aha! I had expected this answer. Now, Baba would not get upset. He would first try to find out what was wrong and then he would call a doctor. Baba would know exactly what to do. They have more experience than us.

MUNNA
Bhaiya, I am sorry. What you say is true. I also like to play and fly kites. But if I also play, then how can I watch out for you? You are my responsibility.
I love you, Bhaiya!

New Words:
foundation : solid base
schedule : timetable
essay : composition on any subject
idling : without any purpose, lazy
mastered : gained expertise, skilled;

Rip Van Winkle
Many years ago, at the foothills of the Kaatskill (Kat-skill)
mountains, was a little village. In the village lived a
simple, good-natured fellow named Rip Van Winkle. He
was a kind neighbour, ready to help anyone. Everyone in
the village liked him. The children of the village shouted
with joy whenever they saw him because he played with
them, he taught them to fly kites and shoot marbles, and
told them long stories.
The only problem with Rip was that he was very lazy.
He did no work on his own farm and just idled away his
time. His fences were falling to pieces. His cow was going
astray. Weeds grew on his farm. Rip's constant
companion was his dog, named Wolf. To avoid work, he
would walk away into the forest with his dog.
One day, Rip just walked on and on and reached the
highest part of the mountains. It was late in the
afternoon when he reached there. Tired after his long
climb, he lay down and began daydreaming. It was soon
evening and he realised it would be night by the time he
reached his village.
Suddenly, he heard a voice calling out, “Rip Van
Winkle, Rip Van Winkle!” He looked around and saw a
short, old man, with thick hair and a grizzled beard
walking towards him with a barrel. He made signs to help
him carry the barrel. Rip hurried to help the stranger who
caught his hand tightly. Together
they reached a place where there
were some more odd looking
men, playing ninepins. They
were all dressed the same
way and all of them had
beards of various shapes
and colours. Even though
they were playing a game,
their faces were serious and there was silence! The only sound was the noise of the
balls, which echoed in the mountains like thunder.
As Rip and his companion reached them, they
stopped playing and stared at Rip with a fixed gaze. Rip
was really frightened. His companion emptied the
contents of the barrel into glasses and made Rip drink it.
Rip obeyed as he was trembling with fear. Since he was
thirsty he drank a few more glasses and slowly fell into a
deep sleep.
On waking up, he found that he was at the place
where he had first met the old man. He rubbed his eyes —
it was a bright sunny morning. “Surely, I have not slept
here all night,” thought Rip.
He looked around for Wolf, but he was nowhere. Rip
whistled for him. “Wolf! Wolf!” he then shouted. No dog
was to be seen. “Where has this dog gone?” he muttered
to himself. He began to descend the mountain to go back to his village.
As he neared the village, he met a number of people
but he didn't know any of them. The villagers also stared
at him equally surprised. “Who is this man?” said one.
“I've never seen him before,” said another, “look at his
long white beard and his wrinkled face.”
On hearing this, Rip stroked his chin and, to his
astonishment, he found his beard had grown a foot long,
and it was all white!
An old woman walked up to him and looked at his face
for a moment. Then she exclaimed — “It is Rip Van
Winkle! Welcome home again, old neighbour! Where have
you been these twenty long years?

(Adapted from The legend of Rip Van Winkle
by Washington Irving);

____________________________________________________________________________V-I

Class Discussion

“In the class discussion Jane, you hardly said a word.
We all aired our opinions but from you we barely heard.
You sat and stared in silence surrounded by the chatter,
Now tell me Jane,
and please be plain,
is there anything the matter?”
Jane looked up and then she spoke,
Her voice was clear and low:
“There are many people in this world
Who are rather quiet you know!”

-GERVASE PHINN
New Words: 
discussion : talking together in a group
on a single topic
aired : make public
barely : only just
stare : look fixedly with eyes wide open
plain : (here) clear;



The Talkative Barber
Long long ago a Sultan, whose name was
Shahriar, ruled over a large kingdom. His
queen was a good storyteller. Each night she
would tell a story to the king. She narrated
ancient Persian and Arabic folk stories. This is
one of the stories, from the Arabian Nights.

In the city of Cashgar, lived a barber who was a great
talker. Once the Sultan called the barber to shave
his head. The barber started talking non-stop
instead of shaving him. The Sultan got angry.
“When are you going to stop talking and begin to
do your work?”
The Barber replied, “You do me an injury by
calling me a chatterer. For, everyone says I am very
quiet. I have six brothers whom you might call
chatterers. Their names are Bacbone (buk-bon),
Bakbarea (buk-buria), Bakbac (buk-buk), Alcouz

(ul-kooz), Alnaschee (ul-nashi) and Schacabac( sha-
ka-bak). One is humpbacked, one is toothless, one

is half blind, one is quite blind, one is deaf and the
other has a defect in his speech and they are all
great talkers, but I am the youngest of my family,
and I am very quiet and sparing with words.”
“Give him three pieces
of gold,” the Sultan cried,
losing all patience, “and send
him away. I will not be
shaved today.”
“My Master,” cried the
Barber, “it was not I who
came to seek you, it was
you who ordered me to
come. So I will not quit
your house till I have
shaved you.”
He then began narrating
another story, which lasted half an hour.
“Stop making your fine speeches and let me go
quickly. I have an affair of the greatest importance. I have
to go out at noon,” said the Sultan.
When he saw that the Sultan was really angry with
him, the Barber said, “O Master, do not be angry, I will
begin to shave you.” Saying this, he washed the Sultan’s
head and began to shave. But he had not touched him
even four times with the razor, when he stopped and
said, “My Master, you are acting hastily in this matter.”
“Go on shaving me, speak no more”, ordered the
Sultan.
“Be patient,” said the barber, “perhaps you have not
considered well what you were going to do. I wish you
would tell me what this matter of great importance is all
about and then I will give you my opinion on it.”
“Finish shaving at once,” the Sultan exclaimed. But,

instead of doing this, the Barber left the Sultan half-
shaved to go and see what time it was.“ My patience is

exhausted,” the Sultan cried.
“Be calm, my Master and you shall be shaved in a
moment,” said the Barber and saying this, he continued
shaving the Sultan. But while he was doing this, he could
not help talking.
“If you could inform me what this important affair is, I
would give more advice, which you might find useful,” he
said.
The Sultan was completely fed up by now and decided
to satisfy the barber. He told him that he was giving a
feast to some friends at noon which was why he was in a
hurry to leave.
When the barber heard the Sultan mention a feast he
exclaimed, “That reminds me. Yesterday, I invited four or
five friends to come to my house today. But I had quite
forgotten it and have not made any preparations for them.” The Sultan who was at the mercy of the
Barber, was ready to do anything to be rid of him.
“Be quick and finish your work,” the Sultan replied,
“and you shall have all the food that has been prepared
for me today.”
“Please show me the food so that I may judge if it is
enough for my five friends.”
“I have enough food for you!” the Sultan exclaimed.
But he ordered that all the food prepared for his feast be
brought in.
The Barber looked over the food and said “This is very
good but I shall want some fruit for the dessert also.”
The Sultan, in desperation, since his head was half
shaved, ordered that the fruits should also be brought in.
The Barber left off shaving
the Sultan to examine
each dish separately.
This took up half
an hour.
The Sultan
stamped his feet
impatiently
but the
Barber did
not hurry.
At length,
however, he again took up the razor but after a few
minutes of work, stopped suddenly and cried, “ I
never knew that you were so generous.”

New Words:
chatterer : someone who talks a lot
defect : a fault
opinion : what a person feels about a person, thing or subject
exhausted : tired and fed up
dessert : a sweet dish served after the main meal
examine : to look at something very carefully
at length : at a stretch;

Topsy Turvy Land
The people walk upon their heads,
The sea is made of sand,
The children go to school by night,

In Topsy-turvy Land.
The front-door step is at the back,
You're walking when you stand,
You wear your hat upon your feet,
In Topsy-turvy Land.
And buses on the sea you'll meet,
While pleasure boats are planned,
To travel up and down the streets
Of Topsy-turvy Land.
You pay for what you never get,
I think it must be grand,
For when you go you're coming back,

In Topsy-turvy Land.
-H.E. WILKINSON

New Words:
topsy-turvy : upside down
pleasure : feeling of enjoyment
grand : big, (here) great fun;



Gulliver's Travels

On the 16th of June 1730 we discovered land. Our
captain sent a dozen men with vessels for water, if any
could be found. When we came to land we saw no river or
spring nor any inhabitants. I went on to explore. The
country was barren and rocky. I turned back to join the
crew, only to see them getting into the boat and rowing
for life to get to the ship.
Before I could reach them I observed a huge creature
walking after them in the sea as fast as he could. The
water of the ocean reached only till his knees! However,
the monster was unable to overtake the speeding boat. I
turned back quickly and climbed up a steep hill with fields
of barley on either side and the corn rising upto forty feet.
There was a fence to pass from one field to the other.
It was impossible for me to climb because every step
was six feet high. I was trying to find a gap in the hedge
when I discovered one of the inhabitants in the next field
walking towards the fence. He was of the same size as the
creature chasing the boat. I was struck with utmost
fear and astonishment and ran to hide myself. He called
in a voice much louder than a trumpet. It sounded like
thunder! Seven monsters like him came towards the field
ready to reap the corn. They carried a reaping hook
which was very big. When one
of the reapers approached
where I lay hidden I
screamed as loud as I
could. The creature
stopped reaping, picked me up between
his thumb and
forefinger and
brought me close to
his eyes, sixty feet
above the ground. He
looked at me with curiosity
and blew my hair aside to get
a better view of my face.
He called his friends and
gently placed me on the
ground.
They all sat on the
ground to take a good
look at me.
I walked slowly backward and forward, pulled off my hat and made a
low bow towards the farmers. I tried to speak to them loudly in
several languages. Each time I did so the farmer who picked
me up held his ear very close to me but in vain. The farmer
took me to his house and placed me at some distance on the
dining table which was thirty feet high from the floor.
Dinner was brought for the farmer in a dish which was ten
feet in diameter. The farmer's wife crumbled some bread and
placed it before me. In the middle of the dinner I heard a noise
behind me. It was the purring of a cat that was ten times larger
than an ox. The farmer's wife was stroking him. Then entered
the farmer's one year-old son in the arms of a lady. On seeing
me the child grabbed me from the table and put my head
into his mouth. I shouted so loudly that the baby
dropped me. I would have broken my neck if the
mother had not held her apron under me.
Later she put me on her own bed and
covered me with a clean white
handkerchief.
I slept dreaming of my home, my
wife and my children.
(Adapted from Jonathan Swift’s
Gulliver’s Travels)
New Words:
bellowing : very loud noise
inhabitants : occupants
barren : land with no vegetation
astonishment : greatly surprised
crumbled : broken into pieces
grab : (here) pick suddenly;


Nobody's friend

She had some sweets that she wouldn’t share,
She had a book that she wouldn’t lend,
She wouldn’t let anyone play with her doll,
She’s nobody’s friend!
He had some toffee, and ate every bit,
He had a tricycle he wouldn’t lend,
He never let anyone play with his train,
He’s nobody’s friend!
But I’ll share all of my sweets with you,
My ball and my books and my games I will lend,
Here’s half my apple and half my cake
— I’m your friend!
ENID BLYTON;


The little bully

Once upon a time, not so very long ago, there was a small
boy called Hari. Although he
wasn’t very big, he was
strong, and he loved to
tease all the boys and girls
who went to school with
him. What he loved to do
most was to pinch. He could
make a big bruise appear in
half a second. Another trick
he played was pricking
people with a pin.
So you can guess how all
the children hated him. They
tried pinching him back, but
that was no good because he could
always pinch harder. They didn't like telling their
teacher, because that was telling tales.
It so happened that the class went for a picnic to
the seaside for a whole day. All the children were
most excited. On that day, the sun shone bright, and all the
children were wild with excitement. They crowded into
the train and sat down — but nobody wanted to sit next
to Hari because he always pinched.
When they arrived at the seaside, out jumped all the
children with a shout of joy. Down to the sands they
raced, hand in hand — but nobody took Hari’s hand.
Nobody went near him.
Hari was angry. He went to a sandy corner near a
rocky pool and sat down by himself. He took out his
lunch and looked at it. It was a good lunch. There were
two hard-boiled eggs, six jam sandwiches, three pieces of
bread and butter, a ginger cake, and a bar of chocolate.
He would eat it all by himself. He wouldn't offer anything
to anyone!
Just as he was beginning on the eggs, he heard a
hoarse voice near him. “Good morning! I am so pleased to
meet a boy like you.” Hari turned around and stared in
fright. Whatever do you think he saw?
Hari saw a monster crab walking sideways out of the
pool. His eyes were on the ends of short stalks and he
looked most queer. He held out his
front claw to Hari. Hari put out
his hand to shake the crab’s
claw, but to his surprise
and anger the crab
opened his pincers
and nipped his
hand so hard that
the little boy yelled.
“Ah, here is my good cousin,” said the crab pleasantly,
and, to Hari’s horror, he saw a large sandy lobster
crawling heavily out of the pool. Before the little boy
could stop him the lobster took his hand in his great
pincer-like claws and pinched it so hard that Hari yelled
in pain. Then he stared at the pool in surprise, for, out came
sandy-coloured shrimps and prawns, more crabs, and
another large lobster and they pricked Hari till he was
soon black and blue with their pinching.
“Don’t you like it?” said all the creatures in surprise.
“Why, we were told you would love to see us because you
were a champion pincher and pricker yourself. Come,
come join in the fun!”
Hari leapt to his feet, crying loudly. His lunch rolled
into the pool, and when the crabs and lobsters saw it
they ran to it and began to feast eagerly. Hari saw that
they had forgotten him for a time, and he turned and ran
for his life, tears streaming down his cheeks.
“They only did to me what I keep doing to the
other children,” he thought. “But how it hurt! And how I
hated those crabs and lobsters! I suppose the other
children hate me too. Well, I jolly well shan’t pinch or
prick any more.”
-Enid Blyton (adapted)
New Words:
bruise : injury by blow to body
horrid : terrible
hoarse : rough and deep sounding
pincer : gripping tool
stalk : main stem
nipped : pinched;



Song of People
Sing a song of people
Walking fast or slow;
People in the city,
Up and down they go.
People on the side walk,
People on the bus;
People passing, passing,
In back and front of us.
People on the subway
Underneath the ground;
People riding taxis
Round and round and round.
People with their hats on,
Going in the doors;
People with umbrellas
When it rains and pours.
People in tall buildings
And in stores below;
Riding elevators
Up and down they go.
People walking singly,
People in a crowd;
People saying nothing,
People talking loud.
People laughing, smiling,
Grumpy people too;
People who just hurry
And never look at you!
Sing a song of people
Who like to come and go;
Sing of city people
You see but never know!
-Lois Lbinski
New Words:
subway : underground passage for people to cross
underneath : below
elevators : lift
grumpy : ill-tempered;



Malu Bhalu
High up in an icy lair
Lived a little polar bear
Snow white, snow bright was her mane,
Malu Bhalu was her name.
Very soon our Malu Bhalu
Learnt the things her parents knew.
Fish to catch, big and small...
Malu was a clever girl.
Malu said to her mother one day:
Ma, I’m going far out to play.
I want to see the things that lie
There beyond the big blue sky.
A little patience, child, said Mum,
In the summer when next it comes.
Summer?... Patience?... What a test!
Malu simply could not rest.
First things first! Malu’s mum
Clasped Malu tight within her arms.
Then she said — her voice was firm
Now my dear you’ll have to swim.
But Ma! said Malu, what do I know?
How will I? I’ve never swum before!
Don’t worry dear, said Malu’s mother,
Do as I do, that’s all, she advised her.
She had no choice, no other way,
Malu had to swim that day.
Tight she gripped her mother’s hand,
Into the water splash! to land.
Brave mother’s brave young daughter!
Doubt and fear she left behind her.
Malu swam with all her might,
It didn't matter wrong or right.
But swimming came so naturally,
Her mother knew this and all could see.
Fearless was Malu, this she knew,
Not just brave, but special too.

Translated from Hindi by SANDHYA RAO
Excerpts from Malu Bhalu by Kamla Bhasin

New words: 
lair : wild animal’s lying-place
mane : long hair on the neck of some animals
clasped : (here) encircle, hold closely
might : great strength;


Who will be Ningthou?

Long, long ago, in the land of
Kangleipak in Manipur, there lived a
Ningthou and a Leima. They were loved
dearly by the people.
The Ningthou and Leima, on their part, never stopped
thinking about their meeyam, their people. “Our meeyam
should be happy,” they said.
The people were not the only ones who loved their
Ningthou and Leima. The birds and animals too loved
them. The Ningthou and Leima always said: “Everybody
in Kangleipak should live in peace. Not only the people,
but the birds, animals and trees.”
Their beloved king and queen had three sons:
Sanajaoba, Sanayaima and Sanatomba.
Twelve years later, a daughter was born. She
was named Sanatombi. She was a lovely child,
soft and beautiful inside. She was loved by
one and all.
The years went by, and the children grew
up well. And then one day, the Ningthou
called all his ministers and said: “It is now time to decide the Tunggi Ningthou, the
future king.”
The ministers were shocked. “But O
Ningthou, what is there to decide? Sanajaoba,
your eldest son, will be our future king.”
“Well,” the Ningthou replied. “That’s how it
happened in the old days. The eldest son always
became the king. But times have changed. So let us
select a king who is most worthy of becoming a
king.”
“We will have a contest to select the future king,”
the Leima said. And so, in the land of Kangleipak,
there was a contest, a horse race. Whoever reached
the khongnang, the banyan tree, first would be
declared Tunggi Ningthou.
But then, a strange thing happened. Sanajaoba,
Sanayaima and Sanatomba all three of them
finished the race together. They were expert riders
and all three reached the finish line at the same
time!
There was great excitement. “Look at them!”
the people shouted. “Shagol thauba nupa, such
fine horsemen!”
But one question remained: Who would be
the Tunggi Ningthou?
The Ningthou and Leima turned
to their sons. The Ningthou
said, “Sanajaoba, Sanayaima and
Sanatomba, you have proved that you 
are fine horsemen. Do something different each one of
you, so that we can decide who will be Tunggi Ningthou.”
Suddenly, Sanajaoba mounted his horse and held his
spear straight in front of him. He looked around. There
was a hush among people. “What is Sanajaoba, the
eldest, going to do? They thought to themselves.
Sanajaoba then looked at the huge khongnang
standing majestically in the distance. He pierced the tree
and jumped his horse right through it!
“Bravo! Bravo!” The people shouted. “Thouro! Thouro!”
And then they fell silent.
Now it was the turn of the second son, Sanayaima.
What would he do? Sanayaima too looked at the
khongnang as he mounted his horse. Then he too rode
towards the tree, harder and harder. The people watched
in silence, afraid even to breathe. When he was really
close, he urged his horse to jump. Higher and higher the
horse rose until horse and rider jumped clear over the
huge tree and landed on the other side in a wonderful
motion.
The people breathed in relief and said in unison:
“Phajei ! Phajei ! Wonderful ! Wonderful !
And now, it was the turn of the youngest son,
Sanatomba. He, too, rode his horse towards the
khongnang and, before anybody knew what was
happening, uprooted it. Triumphantly he carried the tree
to the Ningthou and Leima and laid it at their feet!
Shouts of Thouro ! Thouro ! Phajei ! Phajei !” filled the
mountains.
The people grew restless. Why were the Ningthou and
the Leima taking so long to make the announcement?
They craned their necks to see what was happening.
The Ningthou and Leima were watching Sanatombi,
their five year-old daughter. She looked sad and lonely.
She stared at the khongnang which lay dead by the
throne. Birds flapped worriedly around, searching for
their homes in the tree. Sanatombi walked up to the
khongnang and whispered, “The khongnang is dead. It
was hurt by the spear and now it is dead.”
The people were all attention. The Ningthou stood up.
He looked at the three boys. He looked at the little girl. He
turned to the people. “If anybody is worthy of becoming
the ruler,” he said, “it is little Sanatombi. It was she who
told us to look at the soul of the khongnang. Sanatombi
feels the pain of others. She feels the pain of the people,
the animals, the birds, the trees.”
”I declare Sanatombi the future Leima of Kangleipak,”
the Ningthou said. A silence fell. Everyone turned to look
at the little girl, their future queen. There she stood, all of
five, like a small khongnang, with birds flying all around
her. They sat on her shoulders and on her head. She held
out her hands full of grain and the birds flapped about
her, pecking at the food.
“A Leima is one who doesn’t hurt anybody in the
kingdom.”

-INDIRA MUKHERJEE
New Words:
peace : quiet
worthy : deserving of
contest : competition
spear : hunter’s weapon
triumphantly : victoriously

____________________________________________________________________________V-II

A Bottle of Dew

Natha was the son of a rich landlord.
His father left him large tracts of land when he
died. But Rama Natha did not spend even one
day looking after his land. This was because
he had a funny idea—he believed there was
a magic potion that could turn any object
into gold. He spent all his time to learn more
about this potion. People cheated him often,
promising to tell him about it, but he did not
give up. His wife, Madhumati, was tired of this
and also worried because she saw how much
money Rama Natha was spending. She was
sure that soon they would be without money.
One day, a famous sage called Mahipati
came to their town. Rama Natha became his
follower and asked him about the potion. To his
surprise the sage answered, “Yes, in my travels
in the Himalayas, I heard how you could make
such a potion. But it is difficult.”
“Tell me!” requested Rama Natha, not
believing his luck.
“You have to plant a banana plant and
water it regularly with your hands. In winter,
the morning dew is on the leaves. You have to
collect the dew and store it in a bottle. When
you have five litres of dew, bring it to me. I will
chant some magic words, which will turn it
into the magic potion. A drop of the potion will
change any object into gold.”
Rama Natha was worried. “But winter is only for a few months.
It will take me years to collect five litres of dew.”
“You can plant as many banana plants as you want. But
remember, you must look after them yourself and collect the
dew with your own hands.”Rama Natha went home, and after talking to
his wife started cleaning his large fields, which
had been lying empty all these years. There he
planted rows and rows of banana plants. He
tended them carefully and during the winter
months collected the dew that formed on
them with great care. His wife helped him too.
Madhumati gathered the banana crop, took it
to the market and got a good price for it. Over
the years, Rama Natha planted more and more
plants and they had a huge banana plantation.
At the end of six years, he finally had his five
litres of dew.Carefully, he took the bottle to the sage. The
sage smiled and muttered something over the
water. Then he returned the bottle and said,
“Try it out.” Rama Natha sprinkled a few drops
on a copper vessel and waited for it to turn to
gold. To his surprise nothing happened!
“This is cheating,” he told the sage. “I have
wasted six precious years of my life.”
But sage Mahipati only smiled and called
Madhumati to come forward. She came with
a big box. When she opened it, inside shined
stacks of gold coins!
Now the sage turned to the very surprised
Rama Natha and said, “There is no magic potion
that can turn things into gold. You worked
hard on your land and created this plantation.
While you looked after the trees, your wife sold
the fruits in the market. That’s how you got this
money. It was your hard work that created this
wealth, not magic. If I had told you about this
earlier, you would have not listened to me, so I
have played a trick on you.”
Rama Natha understood the wisdom behind
these words and worked even harder on his
plantation from that day on.
- Sudha Murty;

The Raven and the Fox

Mr Raven was perched upon a limb,
And Reynard the Fox looked up at him;
For the Raven held in his great big beak,
A morsel the Fox would go far to seek.
Said the Fox, in admiring tones: “My word!
Sir Raven, you are a handsome bird.
Such feathers! If you would only sing,
The birds of these woods would call you King
The Raven, who did not see the joke,
Forgot that his voice was just a croak.
He opened his beak, in his foolish pride–
And down fell the morsel the Fox had eyed.
“Ha-ha!” laughed the Fox. “And now you know,
Ignore sweet words that make you glow.
Pride, my friend, is rather unwise;
I’m sure this teaching is quite a surprise.”
-Jean de La Fontaine;


The Unlikely Best Friends
Gajaraj, the elephant, lived in the best booth of
the royal stables. The king was fond of Gajaraj,
and he had ordered that the elephant should
be well looked after.
In spite of royal comforts, Gajaraj was sad
because he had no friends. The mahout, or
elephant trainer, was the only one he ever
interacted with. The mahout was a kind man
who served Gajaraj food, and gave him a bath
in the elephant pond daily. He was a good
caretaker, but not a friend.
“I wish I had a friend I can play with,”
thought Gajaraj. One late evening, a dog
strayed into the stable. Gajaraj could see that
the visitor was tired and hungry. He pushed
some of the food he was munching towards the dog. The visitor wagged his tail, looked up at the elephant to convey his thanks, and then turned his full attention to the food in front of him. As soon as he finished eating, he fell asleep.The next morning, the mahout found the stray dog in the stable. He did not mind the dog. He also noticed that Gajaraj seemed to like the company. So, he threw some crumbs to the dog, which the animal accepted wagging his tail.When the elephant went out for a bath, the dog accompanied his friend. Plunging into the water, the elephant gave himself a shower using his long trunk, as the dog watched. The elephant took a trunkful of water and playfully splashed the water on his friend. The dog yelped for he hated taking showers. The mahout laughed.On their way home, the elephant picked up
the dog with his trunk and placed him on his
back. The dog was delighted to get a ride.
A farmer passing by saw the dog. “Buntee,”
he yelled. The dog ran to him. The farmer
hugged the dog and told the mahout that he was
looking for his dog ever since he disappeared
from his house. He was glad he found him now.
The mahout had no objection to the farmer
taking the dog home. The farmer tossed a
rope round the neck of the dog, saying, “Come
Buntee, let’s go home.” On their way home, the elephant picked up
the dog with his trunk and placed him on his
back. The dog was delighted to get a ride.
A farmer passing by saw the dog. “Buntee,”
he yelled. The dog ran to him. The farmer
hugged the dog and told the mahout that he was
looking for his dog ever since he disappeared
from his house. He was glad he found him now.
The mahout had no objection to the farmer
taking the dog home. The farmer tossed a
rope round the neck of the dog, saying, “Come
Buntee, let’s go home.” Only when the farmer pulled the rope did the dog realise that he was being taken away from his friend. He yelped, the elephant winced, but neither the farmer nor the mahout noticed that the two friends were in tears.
The next day at lunch time the mahout served Gajaraj his favourite food. When the mahout came back after finishing his other chores, he was surprised to see that the food had remained untouched.“Why Gajaraj, aren’t you hungry?” he asked concerned. The elephant did not react. “He may have slight indigestion. Let me not force him to eat,” thought the mahout.
That night too, Gajaraj did not touch his food—nor the next day. Now, the mahout was worried. He ran his hand on Gajaraj’s tummy and felt there was nothing wrong. “Why was he not eating then? Is he missing his friend, that dog?” the mahout wondered.
Meanwhile at the farmer’s house, the dog had also not touched his food ever since he was brought home.
“Are you missing your friend?” asked the farmer remembering the happy look on Buntee’s face while sitting on the elephant’s back. “I cannot see you go hungry,” said the farmer, “If you miss your friend so much, go to him.”
The farmer removed the rope with which he had tied the dog. The dog, though weak,sprang to his feet. He licked the farmer’s hand
once and then ran. He stopped only when he
arrived at the stable.
The elephant picked up the dog with his
trunk and gave him a joyous swing. The
mahout was relieved. He quickly brought the
food. “Both of you eat first,” he said.
By then the farmer who had followed the
dog, joined him. The two of them watched
with satisfaction the two friends eating food.
“It’s not only Gajaraj who has found a friend,”
said the mahout hugging the farmer, “I’ve also
found one.”
-Subba Rao;

A friend's prayer 
May my friendships always be
The most important thing to me.
With special friends I feel I’m blessed,
So let me give my very best.
I want to do much more than share
The hopes and plans of friends who care;
I’ll try all that a friend can do
To make their wishes come true.
Let me use my heart to see,
To realise what friends can be,
And make no judgements from afar,
But love my friends the way they are.
-Jill Wolf;

The Chair
There was a boy called Mario who loved
to have lots of friends. He showed off a lot,
always talking about how many friends he
had at school, and how he was so friendly with
everyone.
One day his grandfather said to him, “Mario,
I bet you a fruit chaat. You don’t have as many
friends as you think you have. I’m sure many
of them are nothing more than companions or
partners.”
Mario accepted the bet readily. However,
he wasn’t sure how he could test whether his
schoolmates were real friends or not. So, he
asked his grandpa for help. He suggested, “I
have exactly what you need. It’s in the attic.
Wait here a minute.”
Grandpa left, soon returning as though
carrying something in his hand, but Mario
could see nothing there.
“Take it. It’s a very special chair. As it’s
invisible, it’s rather tricky to sit on it. But if you
take it to school and manage to sit on it, then the magic will work and you’ll be able to tell who your real friends are.”
Mario, brave and determined, took the strange invisible chair and set off for school. At break time, he asked everyone to form a circle. He put himself in the middle, with his chair.
“Nobody move. You’re about to see something amazing.” Mario tried sitting on the chair. Having
difficulty seeing it, he missed and fell straight
onto his backside. His classmates had a pretty
good laugh.
“Wait, wait, just a slight technical
problem,” he said, trying again. But again,
he missed the seat, causing more surprised
looks and laughter. Mario wouldn’t give up.
He kept trying to sit on the magic chair and
kept falling to the ground until, suddenly, he
tried again and didn’t fall. This time he sat,
hanging in mid-air.
Then he finally experienced the magic
that his grandfather had been talking about.
Looking around, Mario saw Guneet, Asma, and
Deepa–three of his buddies—holding him up,
so he wouldn’t fall. Meanwhile, many others he’d thought of as friends had done nothing but made fun of him, enjoying each and every fall.
Leaving with his three friends, he explained to them how his grandfather had so cleverly thought of a way to show him that true friends are those who care for us. A friend wouldn’t be someone who takes joy in our bad luck.
That evening the four children went to see Mario’s grandpa as he had won the bet. They had a great time listening to stories and eating a lot of fruit chaat. From then on, they used the magic chair test on many occasions and whoever passed became friends for life.;

____________________________________________________________________________VI-I



Neem Baba

Amber returned from
school and sat down in
the shade of the neem
tree in her courtyard.
She felt that the tree
was whispering to her.
She looked at the tree
and spoke to the tree.

Amber : Namaste! I am Amber. I would like to talk to you.
May I?
Neem Baba : Sure, dear Amber. I know you. You played in my
shade in your childhood. You may call me ‘Neem
Baba’.
Amber : I have seen you almost everywhere. Please tell me
something more about yourself.
Neem Baba : I am very old. I was born millions of years ago
somewhere in North India or Myanmar. Soon, my
family spread outside India.
Amber : Outside India? Where else can neem be found?
Neem Baba : My family can be found in many Asian and African
countries and even in some parts of America.
Amber : That’s wonderful! Who gave you your name?
Neem Baba : The story of my name is very
thought-provoking. I was born
in India and given Sanskrit
names such as Arishta (the one
who cures diseases), Nimba and
Nimbaca. The name ‘Neem’ is
given by the Iranians.
Amber : Really?
Neem Baba : Yes, in Hindi, my name is Nimb. In
India, I have other names—Nim,
Leemba, Nimori, Nimbamond,
Nimbe and Nimo.
Amber : You are so well known! That is
wonderful.
Neem Baba : Dear Amber, we become well
known for what we do. People
find us useful and that is why
they know us. Scientists call us
‘bitter grace of God’, ‘nature’s gift
to man’, and ‘cleanliness-parting
tree’. Some even call us ‘magic
tree’ and ‘the tree of the twentieth
century’.
Amber : I know that people clean teeth
with your twigs and protect
clothes with your leaves.
Sometime back, when my brother
had measles, the doctor told us to
put neem leaves on his bed and
make him lie down on them. Can
you explain why?
Neem Baba : The doctors know that neem
leaves have chemical properties
that destroy germs. Measles
cause itching all over the body.
Neem leaves give comfort and do
not allow germs to breed. Neem
leaves, bark, flowers, fruits and
even roots can be used to make
medicines to cure many diseases.
Amber : Yes, I once had a cough and I
could not breathe properly. My
grandmother cured me with a
medicine made from neem bark.
And when my father had itching
in the eyes, she prepared a kajal
from neem flowers, which cured
him.
Neem Baba : Oh, little Amber, you know so
much. Remember, these remedies
are to be used only by people who
are well trained and have a lot of
experience.
Amber : Yes, I will. Tell me Neem Baba,
is there any use of neem for the
farmers?
Neem Baba : Yes. If the powder of neem seeds
is mixed in water and sprayed
on plants and trees, then locusts
don’t eat them. If it is used in
rice fields, where water remains
standing, it stops mosquito
breeding and helps to increase
crop yield. It also saves the crop
from termites, which eat roots
of the crop, and it also stops
breeding of other insects that eat
crops.
Amber : That means, if we put the powder
of neem seeds in stagnant water
around our homes, mosquitoes won’t breed in them! This must
be a cost-effective method to stop
mosquitoes from breeding. Please
tell me other uses of neem in our
daily life.
Neem Baba : Of course. People save their stored
grains from insects by adding
neem seed powder to them. Neem
oil is also used to make soaps
and toothpaste. Furniture made
from neem wood is not eaten
by termites. Neem also purifies
the air. There are many qualities
yet to be discovered. Will you
discover them when you grow
up?
Amber : Yes, Neem Baba. I will. Thank you
for your time today!
Neem Baba : Bless you, my child!
Adapted from Neem Baba
- S. I. Farooqi;


What a Bird Thought

I lived first in a little house,
And lived there very well,
I thought the world was small and round,
And made of pale, blue shell.
I lived next in a little nest,
Nor needed any other,
I thought the world was made of straw,
And nestled by my mother.
One day, I fluttered from my nest,
To see what I could find,
I said the world is made of leaves,
I have been very blind.
At length I flew beyond the tree,
Quite fit for grown-up labours,
I don’t know how the world is made,
And neither do my neighbours.
Anonymous;

Change of Heart
Prabhat always wanted to win. His parents,
teachers, and friends said that he did not
know how to accept defeat. The fact was that
he could not bear losing, not even at marbles.
He felt so good when he won that he never
wanted to give up that feeling. On the contrary,
losing made him feel terrible. He thought that
losing was the worst thing that could happen
to anyone.
If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game,
he would not play it. He would take part only
when he was sure of winning, even if the game
lasted only for a minute. You could not stop
him from playing the kind of games he was
really good at, like badminton.
A new student joined Prabhat’s school, and
his name was Surya. Surya was an excellent
badminton player. Prabhat waited for the last
Friday of the month. Last Friday was significant.
This was when the coach conducted friendly
matches in the games period. The teams were
decided on Monday and it was no surprise
when Prabhat and Surya were chosen to play
a round against each other. Prabhat was given
the responsibility of keeping score for their
match. On one hand, Prabhat prepared for the
match with great seriousness. Surya, on the
other hand, seemed relaxed, not taking the
things seriously at all. He walked about the
whole time, smiling and cracking jokes about all
sorts of things. But on Friday, at the badminton
court, Surya was a real phenomenon. He won
points again and again, laughing and joking all
the time. However, Surya was paying so little
attention to the match that Prabhat managed
to change the scoreboard while his opponent
was looking elsewhere.
Prabhat managed to win by cheating. He
made a big thing of his win, but it did not
matter to Surya.
“It’s been fun. We should play again some
other time,” said Surya.
On that day, everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat
had played so well. Surprisingly, Prabhat could not sleep well that
night. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he
usually did. What was surprising was that Surya did not feel bad
about losing. What was more surprising was that Prabhat saw
Surya playing basketball the next day. Surya
was so hopeless at it that he could not score a
basket for ten minutes. Yet, he enjoyed playing
the game. His happy smile never left his face.
Prabhat kept a close watch on Surya for
some days. He was great at some things,
terrible at others but what was common was
the enjoyment. He enjoyed everything equally.
As Prabhat went on with his observation, he
realised that to enjoy a game, you did not need
a scoreboard to keep a tally of your scores.
Neither did you have to worry about winning
and losing. You needed to enjoy the game for
its own sake. What matters is trying to do well,
and enjoying every moment of it.
Prabhat learnt something through the
observations every day, soon realising the
change in himself. He had even begun playing
hide and seek, and felt sad whenever it was
about to end. He also started joking while
playing badminton. Soon, the other students
started talking amongst themselves, “Good fun
playing with Prabhat, that fellow definitely has
a great sporting spirit.” ; 

The Winner
Evenings,
we play ball
next to the creek
in our neighbour’s field.
We run so fast
I
can’t
even
catch
my
breath.
When blue dark turns to black,
cold grass aches our feet,
trees creep close—
game’s over.
Night wins! 
- Georgia Heard ;

Hamara Bharat — Incredible India!

“So, are you ready to meet your friends from all over the country?” the teacher asked the students sitting in the big hall.
“Yes!” was the loud answer from the class.
“Can someone tell me for which programme are we here?” the teacher asked.
“Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat”, the students answered together again.
“Please raise your hand to tell me what it is all about,” the teacher said.
Many hands went up and some were jumping to answer. The teacher asked Renu. With a smile on her face, she said, “It is to know that we all belong to one nation and that is the bond we share. And our unity in diversity makes us the most wonderful country in the world.” The teacher smiled at her as everyone clapped. Just then, Bala pointed out, “Look! The video has started!” The big screen now had little windows each with a smiling child. Each child had something to share. Pranam! I am
Aakansha from
Uttarakhand. I am
going to tell you
about Aipan, our folk
art, that we draw on
family functions and
festivals. It is done
with white rice flour
paste on brick-red
walls coloured with geru. It is made on floors
and walls of puja rooms, and outside the main
door of the home. It is an art form made by
the women in the family. The designs are very
beautiful and mathematical, and are based on
our cultural traditions, and observations of
nature.
Suprabhat! I am
Priyaranjan from Odisha.
My tribe practises a
4000-year-old metal craft
named Dhokra. To begin,
we make a figure with
clay, dry it, and cover
it with a layer of wax.
Then, we carve the fine
details on the wax. After that, we cover the figure
with clay, and put it in the fire. The wax melts and
comes out of small openings. Next, brass scrap
is melted and poured into the empty space. The
liquid metal takes the same shape as the wax.
Finally, we remove the outer layer of clay and
finish the metal figure as we want.
Suprabhaatam! I am
Chitra from Kerala. I want
to tell you about coconut
shell craft. First, we clean
the outside and inside of a
brown coconut shell. After
that, we make it smooth by using sandpaper or
a machine. Then we give it the shape we want,
and make it stable by fixing a base under it.
At last, we polish it using wood polish to make
it shine. We make household things like bowls
and even jewellery from the coconut shells. It
is a biodegradable craft.
Subhodayam! I am Balamurali from
Andhra Pradesh. I
want to tell you about
the 400-year-old art
of making toys in my
village, Kondapalli.
To make the toys, we
take soft wood from
the nearby hills. After
that, we carve each part of the toy separately.
Then, we use makku—a paste of tamarind
seed powder and sawdust to join the pieces
together. Next, we add details and finish the
toys. Finally, we use oil and water-colours or
vegetable dyes and enamel paints to colour
them. These toys are based on folk stories,
animals, birds, bullock carts, rural life, etc. ;


The Kites
Up in the air
See the kites fly,
Like coloured birds
In the wind-whipped sky.
I wish I were small
And light as air,
I would climb on a kite
And sail up there.
Then I would drift upon
The paper wings,
And hear the songs
That the wild wind sings.
What fun it would be
To look right down,
Over the park
And the rooftops of town.
The people below
Would stand and stare,
And wish they were me
High, high in the air.
- Daphne Lister;

Ila Sachani: Embroidering Dreams with her Feet

When you enter a tiny room in Moti Vavdi
village, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, you will see
lots of bright colours. There are many
lovely things like cushions, bedcovers,
pillows, and more, with beautiful designs.
Ila Sachani, a wonderful lady with a big
smile, makes all these using a shiny needle
to create these designs. She is very good at
Kathiawar embroidery—a style that needs
a lot of skill.
Ila Sachani’s journey began in the quiet
settings of Amreli, Gujarat, where she
was born into a farmer’s family. From the
beginning, life presented its challenges,
as Ila was born with her hands hanging
loose by her sides. Unlike other children,
she could not use her hands in the usual
way. While other small hands drew figures
in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she
wondered why she could not join them.
She too wanted to hold a chalk in her hands
and draw figures on a slate.
Ila’s mother and grandmother
encouraged the little girl and
were single-minded to help her
overcome her challenge. They
were skilled in the traditional art
of Kathiawar embroidery and
decided to share this art with Ila.
They taught her to create many beautiful patterns using her feet! It was
certainly not an easy task, but Ila accepted
the challenge with determination. Her
parents also helped her learn to do things
with her legs, like eating and combing her
hair.
Threading a needle was hard, but Ila did
not give up and became an expert at a
young age. Her younger brother and sister
helped her too. She learned many styles,
even ones from outside Gujarat—Kachhi,
Kashmiri, Lucknawi and others.
For Ila, embroidery became a way to express
herself. At first, she crafted fine designs
only for her family and friends, who were
awestruck by her talent. They talked about
those designs to others. Soon, the people in
the village, too, discovered Ila’s special skill
and the admiration for her work began to
spread.
Word reached the government office, in
Surat. They were moved by Ila’s story and
impressed by her work. They decided to
display some samples of her embroidery
at a state exhibition. This experience
opened new doors for Ila. People observed
the beauty woven by her feet and readily
purchased the creations. Ila was no more a
hidden talent, but famous!
Encouraged by this popularity, Ila
participated in more exhibitions, not just
within the state but at the national level.
She received many awards and honours,
not just for her art but also the willpower
and creativity that her work showed. Ila
Sachani, once a farmer’s daughter facing a
tough challenge, worked hard and became
a celebrated artist and receiver of the
President’s Medal.
The most important change for Ila was
the new independence. Through her skill,
she not only earned a regular income but
also found joy in doing what she loved.
She proved, through her creations, that
challenges can be turned into victories
with focus, hard work, positivity and never
giving up. Her embroidery, created with her feet,
reminds us that art has the power to rise
above physical boundaries and touch
the soul. ; 

National War Memorial
National War Memorial, New Delhi was established in February 2019. It is a national monument
built by the Government of India in honour of our brave soldiers.
Let us read
In Bharat’s heartland, a grand sight to behold,
The National War Memorial, honours brave stories retold.
With respect and grace, it stands with pride,
Each name etched, each stone, each story to confide.
From battle fields to skies, and to oceans wide,
They stand for Bharat, side by side.
The eternal flame, in silence it glows,
Paying homage to their courage that shows.
Their sacrifice, always in our mind,
In blessed memory, forever remind.
With pride and respect, let’s always remember,
At the National War Memorial, their sacrifice forever.
}
Excercises:{
}
}
_____________________________________________________________________________________VI-II

Level 2: {Content: {
Three Questions
The thought came to a certain king that
he would never fail if he knew three
things. These three things were: What is the right
time to begin something? Which people should
he listen to? What is the most important thing for
him to do?
The king, therefore, sent messengers
throughout his kingdom, promising a large sum
of money to anyone who would answer these
three questions.
Many wise men came to the king, but they all
answered his questions differently.
In reply to the first question, some said the
king must prepare a timetable, and then follow it
strictly. Only in this way, they said, could he do
everything at its proper time. Others said that it
was impossible to decide in advance the right time
for doing something. The king should notice all
that was going on, avoid foolish pleasures, and 
always do whatever seemed necessary at that
time. Yet others said that the king needed a
council of wise men who would help him act at
the proper time. This was because one man
would find it impossible to decide correctly,
without help from others, the right time for
every action.
But then others said that there were some
things which could be urgent. These things could
not wait for the decision of the council. In order
to decide the right time for doing something, it is
necessary to look into the future. And only
magicians could do that. The king, therefore,
would have to go to magicians.
In their answers to the second question, some
said that the people most necessary to the king
were his councillors; others said, the priests. A
few others chose the doctors. And yet others said
that his soldiers were the most necessary.
To the third question, some said science.
Others chose fighting, and yet others religious
worship.
As the answers to his questions were so different,
the king was not satisfied and gave no reward.
Instead, he decided to seek the advice of a certain
hermit, who was widely known for his wisdom.
The hermit lived in a wood which he never
left. He saw no one but simple people, and so the
king put on ordinary clothes. Before he reached
the hermit’s hut the king left his horse with his
bodyguard, and went on alone.
As the king came near the hermit’s hut, he
saw the hermit digging the ground in front of his
hut. He greeted the king and continued digging.
The hermit was old and weak, and as he worked,
he breathed heavily.
The king went up to the hermit and said, “I
have come to you, wise hermit, to ask you to
answer three questions: How can I learn to do
the right thing at the right time? Who are the
people I need most? And what affairs are the
most important?”
The hermit listened to the king, but did not
speak. He went on digging. “You are tired,” said
the king. “Let me take the spade and work in your
place.”
“Thanks,” said the hermit, giving the king his
spade. Then he sat down on the ground.
When the king had dug two beds, he stopped
and repeated his questions. The hermit gave no
answer, but stood up, stretching out his hand for
the spade, and said, “Now you rest, and let me work.”
But the king did not give him the spade and
continued to dig.
One hour passed, then another. The sun went
down behind the trees, and at last the king stuck
the spade into the ground and said, “I came to
you, wise man, for an answer to my questions. If
you can give me no answer, tell me so and I will
return home.”
“Here comes someone running,” said the hermit.
The king turned round and saw a bearded man
running towards them. His hands were pressed
against his stomach, from which blood was
flowing. When he reached the king he fainted and
fell to the ground. The king and the hermit 
removed the man’s clothing and found a large
wound in his stomach. The king washed and
covered it with his handkerchief, but the blood
would not stop flowing. The king re-dressed the
wound until at last the bleeding stopped.
The man felt better and asked for something
to drink. The king brought fresh water and gave
it to him. By this time the sun had set and the
air was cool. The king with the hermit’s help
carried the wounded man into the hut and laid
him on the bed. The man closed his eyes and
lay quiet. The king, tired by his walk and the
work he had done, lay down on the floor and
slept through the night. When he awoke, it was
several minutes before he could remember 
where he was or who the strange bearded man
lying on the bed was.
“Forgive me!” said the bearded man in a weak
voice, when he saw that the king was awake.
“I do not know you and have nothing to forgive
you for,” said the king.
“You do not know me, but I know you. I am
that enemy of yours who swore revenge on you,
because you put my brother to death and seized
my property. I knew you had gone alone to see that
hermit, and I made up my mind to kill you on your
way home. But the day passed and you did not
return. So I left my hiding-place, and I came upon
your bodyguard, who recognised me and wounded
me. I escaped from him but I should have died if
you had not dressed my wounds. I wished to kill
you, and you have saved my life. Now, if I live, I will
serve you as your most faithful servant and will order
my sons to do the same. Forgive me!”
The king was very happy to have made peace
with his enemy so easily, and to have won him
over as a friend. He not only forgave him but said
he would send his servants and his own doctor
to look after him, and he promised to give back
the man his property.
Leaving the wounded man, the king went out
of the hut and looked round for the hermit. Before
going away he wished once more to get answers
to his questions. The hermit was on his knees
sowing seeds in the beds that had been dug the
day before. The king went up to the hermit and
said, “For the last time I beg you to answer my
questions, wise man.”
“You have already been answered!” said the
hermit still bending down to the ground and
looking up at the king as he stood before him.
“How have I been answered? What do
you mean?”
“Do you not see?” replied the hermit. “If you
had not pitied my weakness yesterday and had
not dug these beds for me, you would have gone
away. Then that man would have attacked you
and you would have wished you had stayed with
me. So the most important time was when you
were digging the beds. And I was the most
important man, and to do me good was your most
important business. Afterwards, when the man
ran to us, the most important time was when you
were caring for him, because if you had not
dressed his wounds he would have died without
having made peace with you. So he was the most
important man, and what you did for him was
your most important business.
“Remember then, there is only one time that is
important and that time is ‘Now’. It is the most
important time because it is the only time we have
any power to act.
“The most necessary person is the person you
are with at a particular moment, for no one knows
what will happen in the future and whether we
will meet anyone else. The most important
business is to do that person good, because we
were sent into this world for that purpose alone.”
-LEO TOLSTOY
[retold];

A Gift of Chappals

A smiling Rukku Manni threw open the
door. Ravi and Meena rushed out, and
Ravi pulled Mridu into the house. “Wait, let me take
off my slippers,” protested Mridu. She set them out
neatly near a pair of large black ones. Those were
grey, actually, with dust. You could see the clear
mark of every toe on the front part of each slipper.
The marks for the two big toes were long
and scrawny.
Mridu didn’t have much time to wonder about
whose slippers they were, because Ravi dragged
her to the backyard, behind a thick bitter-berry
bush. There, inside a torn football lined with
sacking and filled with sand, lay a very small
kitten, lapping up milk from a coconut half-shell.
“We found him outside the gate this morning.
He was mewing and mewing, poor thing,”said Meena.
“It’s a secret. Amma says Paati will leave
for our Paddu Mama’s house if she knows we
have a cat.”
“People are always telling us to be kind to
animals, but when we are, they scream. ‘Ooh,
don’t bring that dirty creature here!’ ” said Ravi.
“Do you know how hard it is just to get a little
milk from the kitchen? Paati saw me with a glass
in my hand just now. I told her I’m very hungry, I
want to drink it, but the way she looked at me! I
had to drink most of it to throw her off the scent.
Then she wanted the tumbler back. ‘Paati, Paati,
I’ll wash it myself, why should I put you to
trouble’, I told her. I had to run and pour the
milk into this coconut shell and then run back
and wash the tumbler and put it back before she
got really suspicious. Now we have to think of
some other way to feed Mahendran.”
“Mahendran? This little kitty’s name is
Mahendran?” Mridu was impressed! It was a real
name—not just a cute kitty-cat name.
“Actually his full name is Mahendravarma
Pallava Poonai. M.P. Poonai for short if you like.
He’s a fine breed of cat. Just look at his fur. Like a
lion’s mane! And you know what the emblem of
the ancient Pallava kings was, don’t you?” he
looked expectantly at Mridu.
Mridu giggled.
“Think I’m joking? Well, just wait. I’ll show
you sometime. It’s clear you don’t know a thing
about history. Haven’t been to Mahabalipuram,
have you?” he said mysteriously. “Well, when
our class went to Mahabalipuram, I saw a statue
of his thatha’s thatha’s thatha’s thatha’s
thatha’s... etcetera, etcetera... Fact is, Mahendran
here is descended from that very same
ancient cat. A close relative, scientifically
speaking, of none other than the lion. The Pallava
lion, emblem of the Pallava dynasty!” Ravi
went on, walking around the bitter-berry bush,
waving a twig up and down, his eyes sparkling.
“This cat is a descendant of none other than the
Mahabalipuram Rishi-Cat! And if I may
just remind you, they worshipped cats in
ancient Egypt!”
How he loved the sound of his own voice!
Meena and Mridu exchanged looks.
“What does that have to do with anything?”
Mridu demanded.
“Huh! I’m telling you this cat is descended...
from the Egyptian cat-god... no, goddess! Bastet!
Ya! That’s it!”
“So?”
“Well, one of the descendants of that cat-goddess
was a stowaway in one of the Pallava ships, and his
descendant was the Mahabalipuram Rishi-Cat,
whose descendant is —” Ravi flourished his twig at
Mahendran “— M.P. Poonai here... whoop EEK!” he
shrieked, very pleased with himself.
Mahendran looked up, alarmed. He had just
been sharpening his claws on the edge of the
coconut shell. But worse than Ravi’s awful
whoop EEK was a ‘Kreech...!’ from the window.
What a weird sound! If Mridu was startled,
M.P. Poonai was frightened out of his wits.
Hair standing on end, he bounced up and
scurried towards a bamboo tray of red chillies
that had been set out to dry. Trying to hide
beneath it, he tipped a few chillies over himself.
“Mi-a-aw!” he howled miserably.
The ‘kreeching’ went on and on. “What’s that
noise?” said Mridu.
“That’s Lalli learning to play the violin,”
grunted Ravi.
“She’ll never learn a thing. The musicmaster
just goes on playing like a train
whizzing on and on, while Lalli’s all the time
derailing! Going completely off track!”
Mridu crept up to the window. Lalli was sitting a
little distance away, awkwardly holding her violin
and bowstring, her elbows jutting out and her eyes
glazed with concentration. In front of her, with most
of his back to the window, was the bony figure of
the music-master. He had a mostly bald head with
a fringe of oiled black hair falling around his ears
and an old-fashioned tuft. A gold chain gleamed
around his leathery neck, and a diamond ring
glittered on his hand as it glided up and down the
stem of the violin. A large foot stuck out from beneath
his gold-bordered veshti edge, and he was beating
time on the floor with the scrawny big toe.
He played a few notes. Lalli stumbled behind
him on her violin, which looked quite helpless
and unhappy in her hands. What a difference!
The music-master’s notes seemed to float up and
settle perfectly into the invisible tracks of the
melody. It was like the wheels of a train fitting
smoothly into the rails and whizzing along, as Ravi
said. Mridu stared at that huge, beringed hand
moving effortlessly up the violin’s stem, making
lovely music.
Squawk! There was Lalli derailing again!
“Amma!” came a wail from the gate. “Ammaoh!”
“Ravi, send that beggar away!” cried his mother
from the back verandah, where she was chatting
with Tapi. “He has been coming here every day for
the past week, and it’s time he found another house
to beg from!” Paati explained to Tapi.
Mridu and Meena followed Ravi out. The
beggar was already in the garden, making himself
quite at home. He had spread his upper cloth
under the neem tree, and was leaning against its
trunk, apparently prepared to take a little snooze
while he waited for the alms to appear. “Go away!”
said Ravi sternly. “My Paati says it’s time you
found another house to beg from!”
The beggar opened his eyes very wide and
gazed at each of the children one by one. “The
ladies of this house,” he said, at last, in a voice
choked with feeling, “are very kind souls. I have
kept my body and soul together on their
generosity for a whole week. I cannot believe that
they would turn me away.” He raised his voice.
“Amma! Amma-oh!” Sad his wail might be, but it
certainly wasn’t feeble. It began in a deep, strong
rumble somewhere in his withered belly, and came
booming out of his mouth, with its few remaining
teeth stained brown with betel-chewing.
“Ravi, tell him there’s nothing left in the
kitchen!” called Rukku Manni. “And he’s not to
come again—tell him that!” She sounded fed up.
Ravi didn’t have to repeat it all to the beggar.
What his mother said had been easy for them all
to hear, there under the neem tree. The beggar
sat up and sighed.
“I’ll go, I’ll go!” he said wearily. “Only let me have
a rest here under this tree. The sun is so hot, the tar
has melted on the road. My feet are already
blistered.” He stretched out his feet to show large,
pink, peeling blisters on the soles of his bare feet.
“I suppose he doesn’t have the money to buy
chappals,” Mridu whispered to Meena–Ravi.
“Have you got an old pair in the house
somewhere?”
“I don’t know,” said Ravi. “Mine are too small
to fit his feet, or I’d have given them to him.” And
his feet were larger than Mridu’s and Meena’s.
The beggar was shaking out his upper cloth
and tightening his dhoti. He raised his eyes and
looked fearfully at the road, gleaming in the
afternoon heat.
“He needs something on his feet!” Meena said,
her big eyes filling. “It’s not fair!”
“Ssh!” said Ravi. “I’m thinking about it!
Blubbering, ‘it’s not fair, it’s not fair’ isn’t going to
help. In two minutes he’ll be frying his feet on
that road. What he needs is a pair of chappals.
So where do we get them? Come, let’s search
the house.” He pushed Mridu and Meena into
the house.
Just as she stepped into the verandah,
Mridu’s eyes fell on the odd-looking chappals
she had noticed when she arrived.
“Ravi!” she whispered to him. “Whose
are those?”
Ravi turned and glanced at the
shabby-looking, but sturdy old slippers.
He beamed and nodded. “These are just
the right size,” he said, picking them up.
Mridu and Meena followed him
nervously back into the garden.
“Here!” said Ravi to the beggar, dropping the
slippers in front of the old man. “Wear these and
don’t come back!” The beggar stared at the
slippers, hurriedly flung his towel over his
shoulder, pushed his feet into them and left,
muttering a blessing to the children. In a minute
he had vanished around the corner of the street.
The music-master came out of the house and
took an unappreciative look at the three of them
sitting quietly under the tree, playing marbles.
Then he searched for his chappals in the
verandah, where he had put them.
“Lalli!” he called, after a few moments. She
hurried up to him. “Have you seen my chappals,
my dear? I remember having kept them here!”
Ravi, Mridu, and Meena silently watched Lalli
and the music-master search every corner of the
verandah. He scurried around, looking over the
railing and crouching near the flower pots to look
between them. “Brand new, they were! I went all
the way to Mount Road to buy them!” he went on
saying. “They cost a whole month’s fees, do you
know?”
Soon Lalli went in to tell her mother. Rukku
Manni appeared, looking harassed, with Paati
following her.
“Where could they be? It’s really quite
upsetting to think someone might have stolen
them. So many vendors come to the door,”
worried Paati.
Rukku Manni caught sight of Ravi, Mridu,
and Meena sitting under the tree. “Have you
children...” she began, and then, seeing they were
curiously quiet, went on more slowly, “seen anyone
lurking around the verandah?” A sharp V-shaped
line had formed between her eyebrows. Another
straight, tighter one appeared in place of her
usually soft, pleasant mouth. Rukku Manni was
angry! thought Mridu with a shiver. She wouldn’t
be so upset if she knew about the poor beggar
with sores on his feet, she tried to tell herself.
Taking a deep breath, she cried, “Rukku
Manni, there was a beggar here. Poor thing, he
had such boils on his feet!”
“So?” said Rukku Manni grimly, turning to
Ravi. “You gave the music-master’s chappals to
that old beggar who turns up here?”
“Children these days...!” groaned Paati.
“Amma, didn’t you tell me about Karna who gave
away everything he had, even his gold earrings, he
was so kind and generous?”
“Silly!” snapped Rukku Manni. “Karna didn’t
give away other people’s things, he only gave away
his own.”
“But my chappals wouldn’t have fitted the
beggar’s feet...” Ravi rushed brashly on, “And
Amma, if they did fit, would you really not
have minded?”
“Ravi!” said Rukku Manni, very angry now.
“Go inside this minute.”
She hurried indoors and brought out Gopu
Mama’s hardly worn, new chappals. “These
should fit you, Sir. Please put these on. I am so
sorry. My son has been very naughty.” The musicmaster’s
eyes lit up. He put them on, trying not to
look too happy. “Well, I suppose these will have
to do... These days children have no respect for
elders, what to do? A Hanuman incarnate... only
Rama can save such a naughty fellow!” Rukku
Manni’s eyes flashed. She didn’t seem to like Ravi
being called a monkey, even a holy monkey. She
stood stiff and straight by the front door. It was
clear she wanted him to leave quickly.
When he had clattered off in his new chappals,
she said, “Mridu, come in and have some tiffin.
Honestly, how do you children think of such
things? Thank God your Gopu Mama doesn’t wear
his chappals to work...” As she walked towards
the kitchen with Mridu and Meena, she suddenly
began to laugh. “But he’s always in such a hurry
to throw off his shoes and socks and get into his
chappals as soon as he comes home. What’s your
Mama going to say this evening when I tell him I
gave his chappals to the music-master?”
VASANTHA SURYA
[from Mridu in Madras:
Goruchaka Turns Up];

The Rebel

When everybody has short hair,
The rebel lets his hair grow long.
When everybody has long hair,
The rebel cuts his hair short.
When everybody talks during the lesson,
The rebel doesn’t say a word.
When nobody talks during the lesson,
The rebel creates a disturbance.
When everybody wears a uniform,
The rebel dresses in fantastic clothes.
When everybody wears fantastic clothes,
The rebel dresses soberly.
In the company of dog lovers,
The rebel expresses a preference for cats.
In the company of cat lovers,
The rebel puts in a good word for dogs.
When everybody is praising the sun,
The rebel remarks on the need for rain.
When everybody is greeting the rain,
The rebel regrets the absence of sun.
When everybody goes to the meeting,
The rebel stays at home and reads a book.
When everybody stays at home and reads a book,
The rebel goes to the meeting.
When everybody says, Yes please,
The rebel says, No thank you.
When everybody says, No thank you,
The rebel says, Yes please.
It is very good that we have rebels.
You may not find it very good to be one.
-D. J. ENRIGHT;

The Shed
There’s a shed at the bottom of our garden
With a spider’s web hanging across the door,
The hinges are rusty and creak in the wind.
When I’m in bed I lie and I listen,
I’ll open that door one day.
There’s a dusty old window around at the side
With three cracked panes of glass,
I often think there’s someone staring at me
Each time that I pass,
I’ll peep through that window one day.
My brother says there’s a ghost in the shed
Who hides under the rotten floorboards,
And if I ever dare to set foot inside
He’ll jump out and chop off my head,
But I’ll take a peek one day.
I know that there isn’t really a ghost,
My brother tells lies to keep the shed for his den;
There isn’t anyone staring or making strange noises
And the spider has been gone from his web
since I don’t know when,
I’ll go into that shed one day soon,
But not just yet...
-FRANK FLYNN;


The Ashes That Made Trees Bloom

In n the good old days of the daimios,
there lived an old couple whose only
pet was a little dog. Having no children, they
loved it as though it were a baby. The old dame
made it a cushion of blue crape, and at
mealtime Muko—for that was its name—would
sit on it as snug as any cat. The kind people fed
the pet with tidbits of fish from their own
chopsticks, and all the boiled rice it wanted.
Thus treated, the dumb creature loved its
protectors like a being with a soul.
The old man, being a rice farmer, went daily
with hoe or spade into the fields, working hard
from morning until O Tento Sama (as the sun
is called) had gone down behind the hills. Every
day the dog followed him to work, never once 
harming the white heron that walked in the
footsteps of the old man to pick up the worms.
For the old fellow was patient and kind to
everything that had life, and often turned up a
sod on purpose to give food to the birds.
One day the dog came running to him, putting
his paws against his legs and motioning with his
head to some spot behind. The old man at first
thought his pet was only playing and did not mind
it. But the dog kept on whining and running
to and fro for some minutes. Then the old
man followed the dog a few yards to a place where
the animal began a
lively scratching.
Thinking it was
possibly a buried
bone or bit of fish,
the old man
struck his hoe in the earth,
when, lo! a pile of gold gleamed
before him.
Thus in an hour the old couple were made
rich. The good souls bought a piece of land, made
a feast for their friends, and gave plentifully to
their poor neighbours. As for the dog, they petted
him till they nearly smothered him with kindness.
Now in the same village there lived a wicked
old man and his wife, not a bit sensitive and kind,
who had always kicked and scolded all dogs
whenever any passed their house. Hearing of their
neighbours’ good luck, they coaxed the dog into
their garden and set before him bits of fish and
other dainties, hoping he would find treasure for
them. But the dog, being afraid of the cruel pair,
would neither eat nor move.
Then they dragged him out of doors, taking a
spade and hoe with them. No sooner had the dog
got near a pine tree growing in the garden than he
began to paw and scratch the ground, as if a
mighty treasure lay beneath.
“Quick, wife, hand me the spade and hoe!”
cried the greedy old fool, as he danced with joy.
Then the covetous old fellow, with a spade,
and the old crone, with a hoe, began to dig; but
there was nothing but a dead kitten, the smell of
which made them drop their tools and shut their
noses. Furious at the dog, the old man kicked
and beat him to death, and the old woman finished
the work by nearly chopping off his head with the
sharp hoe. They then flung him into the hole and
heaped the earth over his carcass.
The owner of the dog heard of the death of his
pet and, mourning for him as if he had been his
own child, went at night under the pine tree. He
set up some bamboo tubes in the ground, such
as are used before tombs, in which he put fresh
flowers. Then he laid a cup of water and a tray of
food on the grave and burned several costly sticks
of incense. He mourned a great while over his
pet, calling him many dear names, as if he
were alive.
That night the spirit of the dog appeared to
him in a dream and said, “Cut down the pine tree
over my grave, and make from it a mortar for your
rice pastry and a mill for your bean sauce.”
So the old man chopped down the tree and
cut out of the middle of the trunk a section about
two feet long. With great labour, partly by fire,
partly by the chisel, he scraped out a hollow place
as big as a small bowl. He then made a longhandled
hammer of wood, such as is used for
pounding rice. When New Year’s time drew near,
he wished to make some rice pastry. When the
rice was all boiled, granny put it into the mortar,
the old man lifted his hammer to pound the mass
into dough, and the blows fell heavy and fast till
the pastry was all ready for baking. Suddenly
the whole mass turned into a heap of gold coins.
When the old woman took the hand-mill, and
filling it with beans began to grind, the gold
dropped like rain.
Meanwhile the envious neighbour peeped
in at the window when the boiled beans were
being ground.
“Goody me!” cried the old hag, as she saw
each dripping of sauce turning into yellow gold,
until in a few minutes the tub under the mill was
full of a shining mass of gold.
So the old couple were rich again. The next
day the stingy and wicked neighbour came and
borrowed the mortar and magic mill. They filled
one with boiled rice and the other with beans.
Then the old man began to pound and the woman
to grind. But at the first blow and turn, the pastry
and sauce turned into a foul mass of worms. Still
more angry at this, they chopped the mill into
pieces, to use as firewood.
Not long after that, the good old man dreamed
again, and the spirit of the dog spoke to him, telling
him how the wicked people had burned the mill
made from the pine tree. “Take the ashes of the
mill, sprinkle them on the withered trees, and they
will bloom again,” said the dog-spirit.
The old man awoke and went at once to his
wicked neighbour’s house, where he found the
miserable old pair sitting at the edge of their
square fireplace, in the middle of the floor,
smoking and spinning. From time to time they
warmed their hands and feet with the blaze from
some bits of the mill, while behind them lay a pile
of the broken pieces.
The good old man humbly asked for the
ashes. Though the covetous couple turned up
their noses at him and scolded him as if he were
a thief, they let him fill his basket with the ashes.
On coming home, the old man took his wife
into the garden. It being winter, their favourite
cherry tree was bare. He sprinkled a pinch of
ashes on it, and, lo! it sprouted blossoms until it
became a cloud of pink blooms which perfumed
the air. The news of this filled the village, and
everyone ran out to see the wonder.
The covetous couple also heard the story, and,
gathering up the remaining ashes of the mill, kept
them to make withered trees blossom.
The kind old man, hearing that his lord, the
daimio, was to pass along the high road near the
village, set out to see him, taking his basket of
ashes. As the train approached, he climbed
up into an old withered cherry tree that stood by
the wayside.
Now, in the days of the daimios, it was the
custom, when their lord passed by, for all the loyal
people to shut up their high windows. They even
pasted them fast with a slip of paper, so as not to
commit the impertinence of looking down on his
lordship. All the people along the road would fall
upon their hands and knees and remain prostrate
until the procession passed by.
The train drew near. One tall, competent man
marched ahead, crying out to the people by the
way, “Get down on your knees! Get down on your
knees!” And every one kneeled down while the
procession was passing.
Suddenly the leader of the van caught sight
of the aged man up in the tree. He was about to
call out to him in an angry tone, but, seeing he
was such an old fellow, he pretended not to notice
him and passed him by. So, when the daimio’s
palanquin drew near, the old man, taking a pinch
of ashes from his basket, scattered it over the tree.
In a moment it burst into blossom.
The delighted daimio ordered the train to be
stopped and got out to see the wonder. Calling
the old man to him, he thanked him and ordered
presents of silk robes, sponge-cake, fans and
other rewards to be given him. He even invited
him to his castle.
So the old man went gleefully home to share
his joy with his dear old wife.
But when the greedy neighbour heard of it,
he took some of the magic ashes and went out on
the highway. There he waited until a daimio’s train
came along and, instead of kneeling down like
the crowd, he climbed a withered cherry tree.
When the daimio himself was almost directly
under him, he threw a handful of ashes over the
tree, which did not change a particle. The wind
blew the fine dust in the noses and eyes of the
daimio and his wife. Such sneezing and choking!
It spoiled all the pomp and dignity of the
procession. The man whose business it was to
cry, “Get down on your knees,” seized the old fool
by the collar, dragged him from the tree, and
tumbled him and his ash-basket into the ditch
by the road. Then, beating him soundly, he left
him for dead.
Thus the wicked old man died in the mud, but
the kind friend of the dog dwelt in peace and plenty,
and both he and his wife lived to a green old age.
-WILLIAM ELLIOT GRIFFIS
[a Japanese tale];
________________________________________________________VII-I


Quality

I knew him from the days of my
extreme youth, because he made my
father’s boots. He lived with his elder brother in
his shop, which was in a small by-street in a
fashionable part of London.
The shop had a certain quiet distinction. There
was no sign upon it other than the name of Gessler
Brothers; and in the window a few pairs of boots.
He made only what was ordered, and what he
made never failed to fit. To make boots—such
boots as he made—seemed to me then, and still
seems to me, mysterious and wonderful.
I remember well my shy remarks, one day, while
stretching out to him my youthful foot. “Isn’t it
awfully hard to do, Mr Gessler?” And his answer,
given with a sudden smile from out of the redness
of his beard: “Id is an ardt!’’
It was not possible to go to him very often—
his boots lasted terribly, having something
beyond the temporary, some essence of boot
stitched into them.
One went in, not as into most shops, but
restfully, as one enters a church, and sitting on
the single wooden chair, waited. A guttural sound,
and the tip-tap of his slippers beating the narrow
wooden stairs and he would stand before one
without coat, a little bent, in leather apron, with
sleeves turned back, blinking—as if awakened
from some dream of boots.
And I would say, “How do you do, Mr Gessler?
Could you make me a pair of Russian-leather
boots?”
Without a word he would leave me retiring
whence he came, or into the other portion of the 
shop, and I would continue to rest in the wooden
chair inhaling the incense of his trade. Soon he
would come back, holding in his hand a piece of
gold-brown leather. With eyes fixed on it he would
remark, “What a beaudiful biece!” When I too
had admired it, he would speak again. “When
do you wand dem?” And I would answer, “Oh!
As soon as you conveniently can.” And he would
say, “Tomorrow fordnighd?” Or if he were his
elder brother: “I will ask my brudder.”
Then I would murmur, ‘’Thank you! Good
morning, Mr Gessler.” “Good morning’” he would
reply, still looking at the leather in his hand. And
as I moved to the door, I would hear the tip-tap
of his slippers going up the stairs: to his
dream of boots. I cannot forget that day on which I had
occasion to say to him, “Mr Gessler, that last pair
of boots creaked, you know.”
He looked at me for a time without replying,
as if expecting me to withdraw or qualify the
statement, then said,“ld shouldn’d’ave greaked.’’
“It did, I’m afraid.”
“You god dem wed before dey found
demselves.”
“I don’t think so.”
“At that he lowered his eyes, as if hunting for
memory of those boots and I felt sorry I had
mentioned this grave thing. “Zend dem back,”
he said, “I will look at dem.”
“Zome boods,” he continued slowly, “are bad
from birdt. If I can do noding wid dem I take dem
off your bill.”
Once (once only) I went absent-mindedly into
his shop in a pair of boots bought in an emergency
at some large firm. He took my order without
showing me any leather and I could feel his eyes
penetrating the inferior covering of my foot. At last
he said, “Dose are nod my boods.”
The tone was not one of anger, nor of sorrow,
not even of contempt, but there was in it
something quiet that froze the blood. He put his
hand down and pressed a finger on the place
where the left boot was not quite comfortable.
“Id ’urds’ you dere,” he said, “Dose big virms
’ave no self-respect.” And then, as if something had
given way within him, he spoke long and bitterly.
It was the only time I ever heard him discuss the
conditions and hardships of his trade.
“Dey get id all,” he said, “dey get id by
advertisement, nod by work. Dey take id away
from us, who lofe our boods. Id gomes to dis—
bresently I haf no work. Every year id gets less.
You will see.” And looking at his lined face I saw
things I had never noticed before, bitter things
and bitter struggle and what a lot of grey hairs
there seemed suddenly in his red beard!
As best I could, I explained the circumstances
of those ill-omened boots. But his face and voice
made so deep an impression that during the next
few minutes I ordered many pairs. They lasted
longer than ever. And I was not able to go to him
for nearly two years.
It was many months before my next visit to his
shop. This time it appeared to be his elder brother,
handling a piece of leather.
“Well, Mr Gessler,” I said, “how are you?” He
came close, and peered at me. “I am breddy well,”
he said slowly “but my elder brudder
is dead.”
And I saw that it was indeed himself but how
aged and wan! And never before had I heard him
mention his brother. Much shocked, I murmured,
“Oh! I am sorry!”
“Yes,” he answered, “he was a good man, he
made a good bood. But he is dead.” And he
touched the top of his head, where the hair had
suddenly gone as thin as it had been on that of
his poor brother, to indicate, I suppose, the
cause of his death. “Do you wand any boods?”
And he held up the leather in his hand. “ld’s a
beaudiful biece.”
I ordered several pairs. It was very long before
they came—but they were better than ever. One
simply could not wear them out. And soon after
that I went abroad.
It was over a year before I was again in London.
And the first shop I went to was my old friend’s. I
had left a man of sixty; I came back to one of
seventy-five, pinched and worn, who genuinely,
this time, did not at first know me.
“Do you wand any boods?” he said. “I can
make dem quickly; id is a zlack dime.”
I answered, “Please, please! I want boots all
around—every kind.”
I had given those boots up when one evening
they came. One by one I tried them on. In shape
and fit, in finish and quality of leather they were
the best he had ever made. I flew downstairs,
wrote a cheque and posted it at once with my
own hand.
A week later, passing the little street, I thought
I would go in and tell him how splendidly the new
boots fitted. But when I came to where his shop
had been, his name was gone.
I went in very much disturbed. In the shop,
there was a young man with an English face.
“Mr Gessler in?” I said.
“No, sir,” he said. “No, but we can attend to
anything with pleasure. We’ve taken the shop
over.”
“Yes. yes,” I said, “but Mr Gessler?”
“Oh!” he answered, “dead.”
“Dead! But I only received these boots from
him last Wednesday week.”
“Ah!” he said, “poor old man starved himself.
Slow starvation, the doctor called it! You see he
went to work in such a way! Would keep the shop
on; wouldn’t have a soul touch his boots except
himself. When he got an order, it took him such a
time. People won’t wait. He lost everybody. And
there he’d sit, going on and on. I will say that for
him—not a man in London made a better boot.
But look at the competition! He never advertised!
Would have the best leather too, and do it all
himself. Well, there it is. What could you expect
with his ideas?”
“But starvation!”
“That may be a bit flowery, as the saying is—
but I know myself he was sitting over his boots
day and night, to the very last you see, I used to
watch him. Never gave himself time to eat; never
had a penny in the house. All went in rent and
leather. How he lived so long I don’t know. He
regularly let his fire go out. He was a character.
But he made good boots.”
“Yes,” I said, “he made good boots.”
-JOHN GALSWORTHY
[simplified and abridged]

TREES

Trees are for birds.
Trees are for children.
Trees are to make tree houses in.
Trees are to swing swings on.
Trees are for the wind to blow through.
Trees are to hide behind in ‘Hide and Seek.’
Trees are to have tea parties under.
Trees are for kites to get caught in.
Trees are to make cool shade in summer.
Trees are to make no shade in winter.
Trees are for apples to grow on, and pears;
Trees are to chop down and call, “TIMBER-R-R!”
Trees make mothers say,
“What a lovely picture to paint!”
Trees make fathers say,
“What a lot of leaves to rake this fall !”
-SHIRLEY BAUER;


EXPERT DETECTIVES
As we walked back towards the clinic
Seven said, “He doesn’t look anything
like a monster, Maya. But did you see how thin
he is? Maybe he’s very poor and can’t afford
to eat.”
“He can’t be poor if he’s a crook on the run,” I
told him. “He’s probably got millions of rupees
stashed away somewhere in that room.”
“Do you really think he’s a criminal, Maya? He
doesn’t look like one,” Nishad looked doubtful.
“Of course he’s one, Seven,” I said, “and
he certainly isn’t starving. Mr Mehta told us
that Ramesh brings his meals up from the
restaurant downstairs.”
“But Maya, Mr Mehta told us he doesn’t work
anywhere, so how can he possibly have money to
pay for food?” Nishad said.
“Exactly!” I exclaimed. “He must have lots of
money hidden somewhere, maybe in that trunk
in his room. It’s probably full of silver and gold
and jewels and...”
“What rubbish,” Nishad interrupted.
“I know I’m right, stupid,” I told him. “By the
way, Seven, did you see his scars? I couldn’t, it
was too dark, but I bet he got them during a shootout
with the police or something.”
“Mummy told us quite clearly they were burn
scars,” Nishad said firmly.
“Perhaps the police had to set his house
on fire to force him out,” I suggested. Seven
looked unsure.
On the Monday following Mamma’s birthday,
Seven went alone with her to the clinic at Girgaum
as I was spending the evening with a schoolfriend.
When they returned, Nishad told me he’d been to
see Mr Nath and I felt most annoyed that I hadn’t
been there.
Seven had been quite upset about Mr Nath’s
gaunt appearance and was sure that he was
starving. He told me that he had knocked loudly
on Mr Nath’s door that evening and said, “Open
the door quickly, Mr Nath.”
The man had opened it and asked him, “Lost
another marble?”
He had obviously recognised my brother.
“No,” said Nishad. He had taken the man’s
hand in his own, and thrust a bar of chocolate
into it.
“Did you get a chance to peek into the trunk,
Seven?” I asked.
Nishad looked disappointed. “He didn’t even
ask me in,” he said. Then he smiled. “But I did
find out something, Maya. I went down to
the restaurant where Ramesh works and talked
to him.”
“Good for you, Mr Detective,” I said, patting
him on the back, “I hope you questioned him
properly.”
Seven looked pleased. “Ramesh told me that
he takes two meals for Mr Nath every morning
and evening, and two cups of tea, one in the
morning and one in the afternoon. Ramesh says
he’s not very particular about what he eats, it’s
always the same food — two chapattis, some dal
and a vegetable. Mr Nath pays cash and tips well.
“Ramesh told me something very strange, Maya,”
Seven added. “Almost every Sunday, he carries two
lunches to Mr Nath’s room and the same man is
with him each time. He’s tall, fair, stout and wears
spectacles. Ramesh says his visitor talks a lot, unlike
Mr Nath who hardly speaks.”
“Well done, Nishad,” I told him. “Now that we’ve
made some progress with our inquiries, we’ll have
to sort out all the facts like expert detectives so
that we can trap the crook.”
“How you do go on, Maya,” Seven sighed. “How
can you possibly imagine he’s a crook? He looks
so ordinary!”
“Criminals can look quite ordinary, smarty,” I
retorted. “Did you see the picture of the Hyderabadi
housebreaker in the papers yesterday? He
looked like any man on the street.” Nishad
looked doubtful.
The monsoons broke the next day. Dark clouds
accompanied by blinding flashes of lightning
and roaring rolls of thunder burst with all
their fury, flooding the streets with a heavy
downpour. School was to have reopened after the
summer holidays, but no traffic could move
through the flooded roads and there was an
unexpected holiday.
I thought I’d spend the time usefully. I sat at
my desk in our bedroom with a sheet of paper
before me.
I wrote in large block letters:
CATCHING A CROOK
Expert Detectives: Nishad and Maya Pandit
By Appointment to the Whole World
Then I began writing. About half an hour later,
I turned towards Seven who was lying on his
tummy, chin cupped in his palms, reading
comics. “Want to hear what I’ve written?” I asked
He looked up questioningly. “I’ve listed all the
facts we know about Mr Nath which might help
us to trap him,” I said. “Want to hear?”
Seven nodded.
“Fact Number1,” I read, “his name is Mr Nath.
We must discover his first name.”
“Do you think that’s his real name, Maya?”
Nishad asked.
“Probably not,” I said. “Most crooks have an
alias.” I added a big question mark after Nath.
“Fact Number 2,” I read on, “the tenants at
Shankar House say he’s mad, strange and
unfriendly.
“Number 3, he doesn’t talk to anyone and is
mannerless.”
“But he did talk to us, Maya, and Mamma says
he’s very polite,” Nishad interrupted.
“He only talked to us because he had to,” I
said, “and since he was under Mamma’s medical
treatment, he had to be polite.
“Fact number 4, he doesn’t receive any letters.”
Seven nodded.
“Number 5, he’s been living in Room 10 of
Shankar House for more than a year,” I continued.
“Number 6, he doesn’t work and sits in his
room all day.
“Number 7, the kids in Shankar House and
even some of the grown-ups are scared of him.
“Number 8, he has no visitors except for a
spectacled, fair, fat man who visits him on
Sundays for lunch.
“Number 9, food and tea are taken to his room
by Ramesh from the restaurant downstairs. He
doesn’t care what he eats, pays his bill immediately
and tips well. That ends my list. Have I forgotten
anything, Seven?”
Nishad had obviously not been paying too
much attention to my list of facts. All he could
say was, “Poor man, Maya, he must be so lonely
if he doesn’t have any friends.”
“How can a crook have friends, idiot?” I
almost shouted.
“At least he has one friend, the one who meets
him on Sundays,” said Nishad.
A brilliant thought occurred to me just then.
“That man must be Mr Nath’s accomplice in
crime,” I said. “Maybe he keeps all the loot and he
comes now and then to give part of it to his partner,
Mr Nath, for expenses. That’s it! I’m sure I’m right.”
“If you insist on calling him a criminal, I don’t
think I want to discuss anything with you, Maya,”
said Nishad angrily. “He can’t be such a bad man
if he gives Ramesh such generous tips.”
“Ramesh probably knows something about his
past, so Mr Nath must be bribing him to keep
quiet,” I said.
Nishad glared at me with his arms tightly
crossed across his chest. I was beginning to get
fed up with him.
“How can we make any progress with our
investigations if you take that attitude, Seven?”
I asked.
“I’ll cooperate only if you give up this idea
about him being an escaped crook,” said Seven.
“You really make me angry.”
I almost hit him. “I make you angry, you stupid
oaf,” I shouted. “You make me mad! What is the
point of all these
enquiries if he’s not a
crook? If you think he’s
a nobody, what’s the
idea of bothering about
him, please tell me?”
Nishad looked
thoughtful. “I’d like to
find out why he’s so thin
and why he’s so lonely. I want to
know why he doesn’t have any
friends and lives alone.”
“Try to understand, Seven,” I told
him, “if he’s lived in Shankar House
for a year and hasn’t made a single
friend, there’s something wrong.
He’s obviously scared that someone
will recognise him and give him up to the cops.”

“Maybe no one’s tried to make friends with
him,”
Nishad protested.
“Why should anyone bother? You’ve seen what
a nasty bear he is,” I said.

“I don’t care,” said Nishad stubbornly, “I like
him and I’m going to try and be his friend.”
“Friends with a crook! Ha! You’re crazy,
Seven,”I said. “The cops will take you to jail with
him. Do you want that to happen, you idiot?”
Nishad merely glared at me and quietly walked
out of the room. My theories seemed to have made
no impression on him at all.
-SHARADA DWIVEDI
[ from The Broken Flute];



MYSTERY OF THE TALKING FAN

Once there was a talking fan —
Electrical his chatter.
I couldn’t quite hear what he said
And I hope it doesn’t matter
Because one day somebody oiled
His little whirling motor
And all the mystery was spoiled —
He ran as still as water.
-MAUDE RUBIN;

The Invention of Vita-Wonk

Mr Wonka said, “So once again I rolled
up my sleeves and set to work. Once
again I squeezed my brain, searching for the new
recipe... I had to create age... to make people old...
old, older, oldest... ‘Ha-ha!’ I cried, for now the
ideas were beginning to come. ‘What is the oldest
living thing in the world? What lives longer than
anything else?’ ”
“A tree,” Charlie said.
“Right you are, Charlie! But what kind of a
tree? Not the Douglas fir. Not the oak. Not the
cedar. No, no, my boy. It is a tree called the
Bristlecone pine that grows upon the slopes of
Wheeler Peak in Nevada, U.S.A. You can find
Bristlecone Pines on Wheeler Peak today that
are over 4000 years old! This is fact, Charlie. Ask
any dendrochronologist you like (and look that
word up in the dictionary when you get home,
will you please?). So that started me off. I
jumped into the Great Glass Elevator and
rushed all over the world collecting special items
from the oldest living things...
l A PINT OF SAP FROM A 4000-YEAR-OLD
BRISTLECONE PINE
l THE TOE-NAIL CLIPPINGS FROM A 168-YEAR-OLD
RUSSIAN FARMER CALLED PETROVITCH
GREGOROVITCH
l AN EGG LAID BY A 200-YEAR-OLD TORTOISE
BELONGING TO THE KING OF TONGA
l THE TAIL OF A 51-YEAR-OLD HORSE IN ARABIA
l THE WHISKERS OF A 36-YEAR-OLD CAT CALLED
CRUMPETS
l AN OLD FLEA WHICH HAD LIVED ON CRUMPETS
FOR 36 YEARS
l THE TAIL OF A 207-YEAR-OLD GIANT RAT FROM
TIBET
l THE BLACK TEETH OF A 97-YEAR-OLD
GRIMALKIN LIVING IN A CAVE ON MOUNT
POPOCATEPETL
l THE KNUCKLEBONES OF A 700-YEAR-OLD
CATTALOO FROM PERU...”
“All over the world, Charlie,” Mr Wonka went on
“I tracked down very old and ancient animals and
took an important little bit of something from each
one of them — a hair or an eyebrow or sometimes
it was no more than an ounce or two of the jam
scraped from between its toes while it was
sleeping. I tracked down THE WHISTLE-PIG, THE
BOBOLINK, THE SKROCK, THE POLLYFROG, THE
GIANT CURLICUE, THE STINGING SLUG AND THE
VENOMOUS SQUERKLE who can spit poison right
into your eye from fifty yards away. But there’s
no time to tell you about them all now, Charlie.
Let me just say quickly that in the end, after lots
of boiling and bubbling and mixing and testing in
my Inventing Room, I produced one tiny cupful of
oily black liquid and gave four drops of it to a
brave twenty-year-old Oompa-Loompa volunteer
to see what happened.”
“What did happen?” Charlie asked.
“It was fantastic!” cried Mr Wonka. “The
moment he swallowed it, he began wrinkling and
shrivelling up all over and his hair started
dropping off and his teeth started falling out and,
before I knew it, he had suddenly become an old
fellow of seventy-five! And thus, my dear Charlie,
was Vita-Wonk invented!”
ROALD DAHL
[from Charlie and the Great
Glass Elevator];


Dad and the Cat and the Tree
This morning a cat got
Stuck in our tree.
Dad said, “Right, just
Leave it to me.”
The tree was wobbly,
The tree was tall.
Mum said, “For goodness’
Sake don’t fall!”
“Fall?” scoffed Dad,
“A climber like me?
Child’s play, this is!
You wait and see.”
He got out the ladder
From the garden shed.
It slipped. He landed
In the flower bed.
“Never mind,” said Dad,
Brushing the dirt
Off his hair and his face
And his trousers and his shirt,
“We’ll try Plan B. Stand
Out of the way!”
Mum said, “Don’t fall
Again, O.K.?”
“Fall again?” said Dad.
“Funny joke!”
Then he swung himself up
On a branch. It broke.
Dad landed wallop
Back on the deck.
Mum said, “Stop it,
You’ll break your neck!”
“Rubbish!” said Dad.
“Now we’ll try Plan C.
Easy as winking
To a climber like me!”
Then he climbed up high
On the garden wall.
Guess what?
He didn’t fall!
He gave a great leap
And he landed flat
In the crook of the tree-trunk —
Right on the cat!
The cat gave a yell
And sprang to the ground,
Pleased as Punch to be
Safe and sound.
So it’s smiling and smirking,
Smug as can be,
But poor old Dad’s
Still
Stuck
Up
The
Tree!
KIT WRIGHT;

GARDEN SNAKE

I saw a snake and ran away...
Some snakes are dangerous, they say;
But mother says that kind is good,
And eats up insects for his food.
So when he wiggles in the grass
I’ll stand aside and watch him pass,
And tell myself, “There’s no mistake,
It’s just a harmless garden snake!”
-MURIEL L. SONNE;



A Homage to our Brave Soldiers

Soumya K.
House No…, Jayanagar,
Bengaluru
Date: 14 April 2022
Dear Ananda,
Hope you are all doing well!
Do you remember our last conversation about
‘war and peace’? We talked about how India had
to struggle for its Independence from the British
for many centuries. Post-independence our
country has had to fight several wars to protect
its borders, territorial integrity, and its people.
This made me wonder, who were these brave
Indian people? They fought to protect our country
and sacrificed their lives so that we could lead
our lives in peace. What were their names? Where
did they come from? Does anyone remember
anything about them?
Last week I got the answers to some of my
questions during an educational trip to New Delhi
organised by our school. You may recall, I was
looking forward to this trip and our visit to many
places of historical and educational significance.
I learnt several new and interesting things, and I
am excited to share them with you.
Let me begin by asking you to guess the name
of the monument that I found most inspiring. Lets
see if you can guess? The construction of this
monument started in April 2018 and was
completed in February 2019. It was envisioned
and then inaugurated by India’s Prime Minister
Shri Narendra Modi in February 2019. In terms
of location and size, it is spread over 40 acres of
land near the iconic India Gate. But more
importantly, it is a tribute to some of the bravest
Indians. I’m sure you’ve guessed! It’s the ‘National
War Memorial’. Won’t you say, a long desired
aspiration was fullfilled?
Our visit to the National War Memorial began
with our teacher explaining that even after
independence, India has had to fight many wars
to protect itself, and the freedom and security we
enjoy today is because of the many brave men
and women who have served in the Indian Armed
Forces over decades. Sadly, she said, war always
takes its toll, and therefore, many brave soldiers
have had to sacrifice their lives for the country
even after our independence in 1947. This is what
makes monuments like the National War
Memorial extremely important so that we should
never forget the cost of freedom. We are aware,
always, of the pain and horrors of war. We learnt
that each brick of the memorial is called a tablet,
and it bears the names of soldiers who fought for
India and made the supreme sacrifice in different
wars from 1947 till date, including the Indo-China
conflict of 1962, the Indo-Pak Wars in 1965 &
1971 and the Kargil War in 1999. There are
29,000 tablets on which more than 26,000 names
of fallen soldiers have been etched.
It was heartening to know that our government
has recognised the sacrifice of brave soldiers. Our
teacher told us about the 21 bravehearts who
were awarded the Param Vir Chakra (PVC), India’s
highest wartime gallantry medal, for their service
to the nation. She also told us about Maha Vir
Chakra (MVC), Kirti Chakra (KC), Vir Chakra (VrC)
and Shaurya Chakra (SC).
Major Somnath Sharma was posthumously
awarded India’s first PVC, in the Battle of Badgam
in 1947. Later some more PVCs were awarded for
exceptional gallantry during the India-China
Conflict of 1962, and the India-Pakistan War of
1965. Besides, a PVC was also awarded for service
during the U.N.Peace Keeping Operations in Congo.
In the 1971 war, some of the heroes who were
awarded the PVC (posthumously) includes Lance
Naik Albert Ekka, Flying Officer Nirmal Jit Singh
Sekhon, Second Lieutenant Arun Khetarpal and
Major Hoshiar Singh. Some Navy personnel
including Captain Mahendra Nath Mulla were also
awarded MVC for their exemplary courage and
leadership.
Then the teacher shared with us the citation
of Param Vir Chakra awardee Lance Naik Albert
Ekka. It touched my heart and also motivated
me. We were awestruck and humbled by his
bravery. I aspire to be courageous like him when
I join the army!
As we continued our visit around the National
War Memorial, we came across another important
installation called Amar Jawan Jyoti that
commemorates our soldiers. The name, as you
may have guessed, represents an immortal flame
that is kept ablaze all through the day and night
to revere the sacrifices of our soldiers. Earlier the
Amar Jawan Jyoti which also displayed a rifle
and a helmet was alighted under the arch of India
Gate in January 1972 to commemorate India’s
victory in the India-Pakistan War of 1971.
The National War Memorial now includes
Amar Jawan Jyoti in the obelisk which is
surrounded by four chakras. During the
inauguration, the Prime Minister lit a new flame
to commemorate the fallen heroes. Later, the old
flame at India Gate was also merged with the new
flame at the National War Memorial. Here is a
picture of the new Amar Jawan Jyoti if you haven’t
seen it. You can see the obelisk surrounded by
wreaths that have been placed as a mark of
respect. The lighting design is planned in such a
way that it transforms the monument’s landscape
as sunlight changes from dawn to dusk. It truly
is a majestic site that filled me with pride for our
nation. I was also overwhelmed by the
interminable flame as a metaphor for eternal
stories of courage and valour.
Our teacher also explained the significance of
the Chakras to us. I found it interesting and hence
sharing with you.
The National War Memorial consists of 4
concentric circles which are known as Amar
Chakra, Veerta Chakra, Tyag Chakra and Raksha
Chakra around a 15-meter-tall central obelisk
with the eternal flame— the Amar Jawan Jyoti. It
also houses bronze and stone murals and graphic
panels. Isn’t it amazing!
The innermost circle represents the Amar
Chakra, also known as the ‘Circle of Immortality’.
This has the Obelisk with Eternal Flame. The
Amar Jawan Jyoti flame symbolises the
immortality of the spirit of fallen soldiers with the
assurance that the nation will never forget their
sacrifice.
The second circle is called the Veerta Chakra
which is also known as the ‘Circle of Bravery’.
There is a covered gallery that exhibits six murals
crafted in bronze depicting valiant battle actions
of our Armed Forces.
The third circle represents the Tyag Chakra,
also known as the ‘Circle of Sacrifice’. The circular
concentric walls of honour symbolise the ancient
war formation which is called Chakravyuh. The
walls are covered with granite tablets and
individual tablet is solely dedicated to each fallen
hero of post-Independent India. Their names are
etched in golden letters.
The outermost circle represents the Raksha
Chakra, which is also known as the ‘Circle of
Our teacher also explained the significance of
the Chakras to us. I found it interesting and hence
sharing with you.
The National War Memorial consists of 4
concentric circles which are known as Amar
Chakra, Veerta Chakra, Tyag Chakra and Raksha
Chakra around a 15-meter-tall central obelisk
with the eternal flame— the Amar Jawan Jyoti. It
also houses bronze and stone murals and graphic
panels. Isn’t it amazing!
The innermost circle represents the Amar
Chakra, also known as the ‘Circle of Immortality’.
This has the Obelisk with Eternal Flame. The
Amar Jawan Jyoti flame symbolises the
immortality of the spirit of fallen soldiers with the
assurance that the nation will never forget their
sacrifice.
The second circle is called the Veerta Chakra
which is also known as the ‘Circle of Bravery’.
There is a covered gallery that exhibits six murals
crafted in bronze depicting valiant battle actions
of our Armed Forces.
The third circle represents the Tyag Chakra,
also known as the ‘Circle of Sacrifice’. The circular
concentric walls of honour symbolise the ancient
war formation which is called Chakravyuh. The
walls are covered with granite tablets and
individual tablet is solely dedicated to each fallen
hero of post-Independent India. Their names are
etched in golden letters.
The outermost circle represents the Raksha
Chakra, which is also known as the ‘Circle of
Protection’. In this chakra the row of trees is a
reassurance to the citizens of the country about
their safety against any threat. Each tree
represents the soldiers who ensure the territorial
integrity of the nation We spent the whole day, from morning to
evening, at the National War Memorial and the
surrounding areas, marked by majestic lawns
and grand buildings of Kartavyapath. We were
immersed in the ambience that was solemn and
a reminder of what a free nation could achieve.
The overall environment created an emotive
experience that was visually inspiring. I felt as
if I had developed bond with the place.
I learnt a lot. But I also have to admit that the
various discourses on the day brought tears to
my eyes. It was sad to think about the massive
devastation and loss of life caused by wars. It
motivated me to live a life worthy of the sacrifices
of our heroes.
After our visit, the class decided to make
presentations on stories of valour of the brave
hearts, we came across at the National War
Memorial. We divided ourselves into five groups.
We are choosing martyrs to make presentations
depicting their courageous stories. Our teacher
has also advised us to share our experience
during the school assembly. I am delighted that
all the students of our school will get to know
about the National War Memorial and the soldiers
it commemorates.
I am going to give a presentation on the story
of Major Padmapani Acharya who fought for India
in the 1999 Kargil War and was awarded the Maha
Vir Chakra.
The citation for the Maha Vir Chakra reads as
follows:
Before he went into battle, he wrote a letter to his
father that he wasn’t afraid or scared about losing
his life while trying to protect the motherland.
Quoting Shrimad Bhagavad Gita, he went on to say:
grks ok çkIL;fl LoxaZ ftRok ok Hkks{;ls eghe~A
rLeknqfÙk"B dkSUrs; ;q¼k; Ñrfu'p;%AA2-37AA
Hato vaa praapsyasi svargam jitvaa vaa bhokshyase mahiim
Tasmaaduttishtha kaunteya yuddhaaya kritanischayah
If you fight, you will either be slain on the battlefield and go
to the celestial abodes, or you will gain victory and enjoy the
kingdom on earth. Therefore arise with determination.
O, son of Kunti, and be prepared to fight.
Here is the website link for National War Memorial
https://nationalwarmemorial.gov.in/. Share it
with your friends to learn more about it
We reached Bengaluru yesterday. I have
written a long letter as I could not help sharing
this inspiring experience with you.
Give my regards to your Mom and Dad. I miss
your Mom’s Chhole Bhature. You know I am a
foodie! Say hello to Amit.
Your friend,
Soumya


Ananda,
House No…., Sector …
Chandigarh.
Date: 24 April 2022
Dear Soumya,
It was such a pleasure to receive your letter. I
enjoyed reading your experience of the visit to the
National War Memorial in Delhi, as well as your
observations and feelings during the visit. You
really have an eye for detail and being the sensitive
person that you are, you have been able to capture
the essence of the emotions associated with this
Memorial.
I was happy to hear that you got an opportunity
to visit the National War Memorial. I have heard a
lot about it. Some people might see a war
memorial as just a monument, statue, an edifice
to celebrate a war or victory and commemorate
those who were martyred or injured in war. In my
view, it is also an expression of deep gratitude for
the supreme sacrifice made by our brave soldiers
defending the sovereignty and integrity of the
country. I feel motivated and I am seriously
thinking of joining the Armed Forces for serving
my motherland.
I also feel it is our duty to periodically visit
such places to honour our valiant soldiers, who
have made great sacrifices for us. Their sacrifices
enable us to walk freely in our country without
fear of enemy threats. It is nice of your teacher
and school to arrange this visit to give you all a
chance to learn about India’s heroes and also
pay your respect to them. The idea of your class
to make a presentation at the school and making
every one a part of your experience is wonderful!
Best of luck for your presentation, I hope it goes
well and motivates the school students to join
the Indian Armed Forces.
Your letter has reminded me of a time when
we visited the war memorial in our city. If I
remember correctly, the day was National Martyrs
Day. While visiting one of Chandigarh’s gardens
we saw a lot of activity around the Bougainvillea
Garden in Sector 3. As we approached the garden,
we saw people offering flowers and prayers. We
joined the group out of curiosity and quickly
realised that they were all there to pay respect to
the soldiers at the War Memorial.
When I think back about my visit where
everyone was dedicating flowers as a mark of
respect to our soldiers, I was reminded of the
following poem:
Pushp ki Abhilasha
Chah Nahi, Main Sur Bala
Ke Gehano Mein Goontha Jaaun,
Chaah Nahi, Premi Mala Mein
Bindh Pyaari Ko Lalchaaun!
Chaah Nahi, Samraato Ke Shav
Par, He Hari, Dala Jaaun,
Chaah Nahi, Dewon Ke Sar Par
Chadhoon, Bhagya Par Itraun!
Mujhe Tod Lena, Banmali!
Us Path Mein Tum Dena Phaink,
Matra Bhoomi Per Sheesh Chadhane
Jis Path Jaayen Veer Anek!
–Makhanlal Chaturvedi
iq"i dh vfHkyk"kk
pkg ugha] eSa lqjckyk ds
xguksa esa xw¡Fkk tkÅ¡]
pkg ugha] çseh&ekyk esa
ca/ I;kjh dks yypkÅ¡!
pkg ugha] lezkVksa ds 'ko
ij] gs gfj] Mkyk tkÅ¡]
pkg ugha] nsoksa ds flj ij
p<+w¡] HkkX; ij bBykÅ¡!
eq>s rksM+ ysuk] ouekyh!
ml iFk ij nsuk rqe iQsad]
ekr`Hkwfe ij 'kh'k p<+kus
ftl iFk tkosa ohj vusd!
&ek[kuyky prqosZnh
I hope you like the poem. I must say, I was
inspired by your idea of presenting the valourous
stories of India’s soldiers. There are so many stories of courage, bravery, and sacrifice which
remind us that many of the challenges we face in
our lives are inconsequential. We can enjoy peace
in our country and the luxury of exchanging ideas
with our friends because our Armed Forces are
alert and work hard to create that environment
for us. Very recently I read in the newspaper that
Captain Anuj Nayyar, MVC, an Indian Army
officer of the 17 Jat regiment was posthumously
awarded the Maha Vir Chakra, India’s second
highest gallantry award, for exemplary valour
during the Kargil War in 1999. I look forward to
learning more about him. Meanwhile, I learnt
that his mother Meena Nayyar has written a
memoir titled Tiger of Drass– Capt. Anuj Nayyar
– 23 – Kargil Hero which I shall certainly go
through. I am sharing with you an excerpt of her
interview with IANS.
“Writing about the smallest things about your
child who is not with you really used to shake
me but gradually I came to terms with it by
telling myself that if I didn’t write about him no
one in the world would or could, and no one
will know about Anuj’s sacrifice,”
Published on : 13 Apr, 2022, 1:59 pm
I have shared your experience with many of
my friends. We all wish to visit the National War
Memorial, Delhi. We have found out a mobile app
‘National War Memorial and Museum’. This app
is very interactive and provides answers to our
queries in 21 languages. The murals on the walls
are enchanting. A great learning experience
indeed!
Next week, I am going to share this idea with
my classmates and my teacher. I think it would be
great to create a collage capturing the lives and
stories of people that can inspire us each day.
I know that we can email each other. I really
like to receive letters from you, not just because
of the ideas that you share but also because the
envelope of your letters often comes with beautiful
stamps, that make me happy. I don’t know if I
ever shared it before, but collecting stamps is one
of my favourite hobbies. I’ve been doing it for
years. But I learnt recently that the act of collecting
stamps is called ‘philately’. This time I received a
stamp that celebrates India’s independence, a
theme related to your letter.
Okay, that’s all from me for now. But before I
conclude, guess what we had for breakfast!—
fluffy idlies and we all remembered you. Give my
regards to your parents.
I am inspired by your letter!
Hope to hear from you soon about your new
adventures and experiences.
Best wishes,
Ananda


MEADOW SURPRISES

Meadows have surprises,
You can find them if you look;
Walk softly through the velvet grass,
And listen by the brook.
You may see a butterfly
Rest upon a buttercup
And unfold its drinking straws
To sip the nectar up.
You may scare a rabbit
Who is sitting very still;
Though at first you may not see him,
When he hops you will.
A dandelion whose fuzzy head
Was golden days ago
Has turned to airy parachutes
That flutter when you blow.
Explore the meadow houses,
The burrows in the ground,
A nest beneath tall grasses,
The ant’s amazing mound.
Oh! Meadows have surprises
And many things to tell;
You may discover these yourself,
If you look and listen well.
-LOIS BRANDT PHILLIPS
_________________________________________________________VII-II

The best christmas present in the world

I spotted it in a junk shop in Bridport, a roll-top desk.
The man said it was early nineteenth century, and oak.
I had wanted one, but they were far too expensive. This
one was in a bad condition, the roll-top in several pieces,
one leg clumsily mended, scorch marks all down one
side. It was going for very little money. I thought I could
restore it. It would be a risk, a challenge, but I had to
have it. I paid the man and brought it back to my
workroom at the back of the garage. I began work on it
on Christmas Eve.
I removed the roll-top completely and pulled out the
drawers. The veneer had lifted almost everywhere — it
looked like water damage to me. Both fire and water had
clearly taken their toll on this desk. The last drawer was
stuck fast. I tried all I could to ease it out gently. In the
end I used brute force. I struck it sharply with the side of
my fist and the drawer flew open to reveal a shallow space
underneath, a secret drawer. There was something in
there. I reached in and took out a small black tin box.
Sello-taped to the top of it was a piece of lined notepaper,
and written on it in shaky
handwriting: “Jim’s
last letter, received
January 25, 1915.
To be buried with
me when the
time comes.” I
knew as I did
it that it was
wrong of me to
open the box,
but curiosity
got the better of
my scruples. It
usually does.
Inside the box there was an envelope. The address
read: “Mrs Jim Macpherson, 12 Copper Beeches, Bridport,
Dorset.” I took out the letter and unfolded it. It was written
in pencil and dated at the top — “December 26, 1914”.
Dearest Connie,
I write to you in a much happier frame of mind because
something wonderful has just happened that I must tell
you about at once. We were all standing to in our trenches
yesterday morning, Christmas morning. It was crisp and
quiet all about, as beautiful a morning as I’ve ever seen, as
cold and frosty as a Christmas morning should be.
I should like to be able to tell you that we began it.
But the truth, I’m ashamed to say, is that Fritz began it.
First someone saw a white flag waving from the trenches
opposite. Then they were calling out to us from across
no man’s land, “Happy Christmas, Tommy! Happy
Christmas!” When we had got over the surprise, some of
us shouted back, “Same to you, Fritz! Same to you!” I
thought that would be that. We all did. But then suddenly
one of them was up there in his grey greatcoat and waving
a white flag. “Don’t shoot, lads!” someone shouted. And
no one did. Then there was another Fritz up on the
parapet, and another. “Keep your heads down,” I told the
men, “it’s a trick.” But it wasn’t.
One of the Germans was waving a bottle above his
head. “It is Christmas Day, Tommy. We have schnapps.
We have sausage. We meet you? Yes?” By this time there
were dozens of them walking towards us across no man’s
land and not a rifle between them. Little Private Morris
was the first up. “Come on, boys. What are we waiting
for?” And then there was no stopping them. I was the
officer. I should have stopped them there and then, I
suppose, but the truth is that it never even occurred to
me I should. All along their line and ours I could see
men walking slowly towards one another, grey coats,
khaki coats meeting in the middle. And I was one of
them. I was part of this. In the middle of the war we
were making peace.
You cannot imagine, dearest Connie, my feelings as
I looked into the eyes of the Fritz officer, who approached
me, hand outstretched. “Hans Wolf,” he said, gripping
my hand warmly and holding it. “I am from Dusseldorf.
I play the cello in the orchestra. Happy Christmas.”
“Captain Jim Macpherson,” I replied. “And a Happy
Christmas to you too. I’m a school teacher from Dorset,
in the west of England.”
“Ah, Dorset,” he smiled. “I know this place. I know it
very well.” We shared my rum ration and his excellent
sausage. And we talked, Connie, how we talked. He spoke
almost perfect English. But it turned out that he had
never set foot in Dorset, never even been to England.
He had learned all he knew of England from school,
and from reading books in English. His favourite writer
was Thomas Hardy, his favourite book Far from the
Madding Crowd. So out there in no man’s land we talked
of Bathsheba and Gabriel Oak and Sergeant Troy and
Dorset. He had a wife and one son, born just six months
ago. As I looked about me there were huddles of khaki
and grey everywhere, all over no man’s land, smoking,
laughing, talking, drinking, eating. Hans Wolf and I
shared what was left of your wonderful Christmas cake,
Connie. He thought the marzipan was the best he had
ever tasted. I agreed. We agreed about everything, and
he was my enemy. There never was a Christmas party
like it, Connie.
Then someone, I don’t know who, brought out a
football. Greatcoats were dumped in piles to make
goalposts, and the next thing we knew it was Tommy
against Fritz out in the middle of no man’s land. Hans
Wolf and I looked on and cheered, clapping our hands
and stamping our feet, to keep out the cold as much as
anything. There was a moment when I noticed our
breaths mingling in the air between us. He saw it too
and smiled. “Jim Macpherson,” he said after a while,
“I think this is how we should resolve this war. A football
match. No one dies in a football match. No children are
orphaned. No wives become widows.”
“I’d prefer cricket,” I told him. “Then we Tommies
could be sure of winning, probably.” We laughed at
that, and together we watched the game. Sad to say,
Connie, Fritz won, two goals to one. But as Hans Wolf
generously said, our goal was wider than theirs, so it
wasn’t quite fair.
The time came, and all too soon, when the game was
finished, the schnapps and the rum and the sausage
had long since run out, and we knew it was all over.
I wished Hans well and told him I hoped he would see
his family again soon, that the fighting would end and
we could all go home.
“I think that is what every soldier wants, on both
sides,” Hans Wolf said. “Take care, Jim Macpherson.
I shall never forget this moment, nor you.” He saluted
and walked away from me slowly, unwillingly, I felt.
He turned to wave just once and then became one of
the hundreds of grey-coated men drifting back towards
their trenches.
That night, back in our dugouts, we heard them
singing a carol, and singing it quite beautifully. It was
Stille Nacht, Silent Night. Our boys gave them a rousing
chorus of While Shepherds Watched. We exchanged
carols for a while and then we all fell silent. We had had
our time of peace and goodwill, a time I will treasure as
long as I live.
Connie, Fritz won, two goals to one. But as Hans Wolf
generously said, our goal was wider than theirs, so it
wasn’t quite fair.
The time came, and all too soon, when the game was
finished, the schnapps and the rum and the sausage
had long since run out, and we knew it was all over.
I wished Hans well and told him I hoped he would see
his family again soon, that the fighting would end and
we could all go home.
“I think that is what every soldier wants, on both
sides,” Hans Wolf said. “Take care, Jim Macpherson.
I shall never forget this moment, nor you.” He saluted
and walked away from me slowly, unwillingly, I felt.
He turned to wave just once and then became one of
the hundreds of grey-coated men drifting back towards
their trenches.
That night, back in our dugouts, we heard them
singing a carol, and singing it quite beautifully. It was
Stille Nacht, Silent Night. Our boys gave them a rousing
chorus of While Shepherds Watched. We exchanged
carols for a while and then we all fell silent. We had had
our time of peace and goodwill, a time I will treasure as
long as I live.
I folded the letter again and slipped it carefully back
into its envelope. I kept awake all night. By morning I
knew what I had to do. I drove into Bridport, just a few
miles away. I asked a boy walking his dog where Copper
Beeches was. House number 12 turned out to be nothing
but a burned-out shell, the roof gaping, the windows
boarded-up. I knocked at the house next door and asked
if anyone knew the whereabouts of a Mrs Macpherson.
Oh yes, said the old man in his slippers, he knew her
well. A lovely old lady, he told me, a bit muddle-headed,
but at her age she was entitled to be, wasn’t she? A
hundred and one years old. She had been in the house
when it caught fire. No one really knew how the fire had
started, but it could well have been candles. She used
candles rather than electricity, because she always
thought electricity was too expensive. The fireman had
got her out just in time. She was in a nursing home
now, he told me, Burlington House, on the Dorchester
road, on the other side of town.
I found Burlington House Nursing Home easily enough.
There were paper chains up in the hallway and a lighted
Christmas tree stood in the corner with a lopsided angel
on top. I said I was a friend come to visit Mrs Macpherson
to bring her a Christmas present. I could see through
into the dining room where everyone was wearing a paper
hat and singing. The matron had a hat on too and
seemed happy enough to see me. She even offered me a
mince pie. She walked me along the corridor.
“Mrs Macpherson is not in with the others,” she told
me. “She’s rather confused today so we thought it best
if she had a good rest. She has no family you know, no
one visits. So I’m sure she’ll be only too pleased to see
you.” She took me into a conservatory with wicker chairs
and potted plants all around and left me.
The old lady was sitting in a wheelchair, her hands
folded in her lap. She had silver white hair pinned into a
wispy bun. She was gazing out at
the garden. “Hello,” I said. She
turned and looked up at me
vacantly. “Happy Christmas,
Connie,” I went on. “I found
this. I think it’s yours.” As I was
speaking her eyes never left my
face. I opened the tin box and
gave it to her. That was the
moment her eyes lit up with
recognition and her face
became suffused with a sudden
glow of happiness. I explained
about the desk, about how I
had found it, but I don't think
she was listening. For a while
she said nothing, but stroked the letter tenderly with her
fingertips.
Suddenly she reached out and took my hand. Her
eyes were filled with tears. “You told me you’d come home
by Christmas, dearest,” she said. “And here you are,
the best Christmas present in the world. Come closer,
Jim dear, sit down.”
I sat down beside her, and she kissed my cheek. “I
read your letter so often Jim, every day. I wanted to
hear your voice in my head. It always made me feel you
were with me. And now you are. Now you’re back you
can read it to me yourself. Would you do that for me,
Jim dear? I just want to hear your voice again. I’d love
that so much. And then perhaps we’ll have some tea.
I’ve made you a nice Christmas cake, marzipan all
around. I know how much you love marzipan.”
-MICHAEL MORPURGO;

The Ant and the Cricket

A silly young cricket, accustomed to sing
Through the warm, sunny months of gay summer and spring,
Began to complain when he found that, at home,
His cupboard was empty, and winter was come.
Not a crumb to be found
On the snow-covered ground;
Not a flower could he see,
Not a leaf on a tree.
“Oh! what will become,” says the cricket, “of me?”
At last by starvation and famine made bold,
All dripping with wet, and all trembling with cold,
Away he set off to a miserly ant,
To see if, to keep him alive, he would grant
Him shelter from rain,
And a mouthful of grain.
He wished only to borrow;
He’d repay it tomorrow;
If not, he must die of starvation and sorrow.

Says the ant to the
cricket, “I’m your servant
and friend,
But we ants never
borrow; we ants never
lend.
But tell me, dear cricket,
did you lay nothing by
When the weather was
warm?” Quoth the cricket,
“Not I!
My heart was so light
That I sang day and night,
For all nature looked gay.”
“You sang, Sir, you say?
Go then,” says the ant, “and dance the winter away.”
Thus ending, he hastily lifted the wicket,
And out of the door turned the poor little cricket.
Folks call this a fable. I’ll warrant it true:
Some crickets have four legs, and some have two.
-adapted from Aesop’s Fables
Glossary :
accustomed to sing: used to singing; in the habit of singing
famine: scarcity of food; having nothing to eat
lay nothing by: save nothing
quoth: (old English) said;

The Tsunami

These stories are all from the Andaman and Nicobar
archipelago.
Ignesious was the manager of a cooperative society
in Katchall. His wife woke him up at 6 a.m. because she
felt an earthquake. Ignesious carefully took his television
set off its table and put it down on the ground so that it
would not fall and break. Then the family rushed out of
the house.
When the tremors stopped, they saw the sea rising.
In the chaos and confusion, two of his children caught
hold of the hands of their mother’s father and mother’s
brother, and rushed in the opposite direction. He never
saw them again. His wife was also swept away. Only the
three other children who came with him were saved.

Sanjeev was a policeman, serving in the Katchall island
of the Nicobar group of islands. He somehow managed to
save himself, his wife and his baby daughter from the
waves. But then he heard cries for help from the wife of
John, the guesthouse cook. Sanjeev jumped into the water
to rescue her, but they were both swept away.
Thirteen year-old Meghna was swept away along with
her parents and seventy-seven other people. She spent
two days floating in the sea, holding on to a wooden door.
Eleven times she saw relief helicopters overhead, but they
did not see her. She was brought to the shore by a wave,
and was found walking on the seashore in a daze.

Almas Javed was ten years old. She was a student of
Carmel Convent in Port Blair where her father had a
petrol pump. Her mother Rahila’s home was in
Nancowry island. The family had gone there to celebrate
Christmas.
When the tremors came early in the morning, the
family was sleeping. Almas’s father saw the sea water
recede. He understood that the water would come
rushing back with great force. He woke everyone up
and tried to rush them to a safer place.
As they ran, her grandfather was hit on the head by
something and he fell down. Her father rushed to help
him. Then came the first giant wave that swept both of
them away.
Almas’s mother and
aunts stood clinging to the
leaves of a coconut tree,
calling out to her. A wave
uprooted the tree, and they
too were washed away.
Almas saw a log of wood
floating. She climbed on to
it. Then she fainted. When
she woke up, she was in a
hospital in Kamorta. From there she was brought to
Port Blair.
The little girl does not want to talk about the incident
with anyone. She is still traumatised.

Tilly Smith (a British school girl) was able to save many
lives when the tsunami struck Phuket beach in Thailand.
Though she has won a number of awards, her parents
have not allowed their daughter to be interviewed on
television and made into a heroine. Why do you think they
took that decision?
Now here is a story from Thailand.
The Smith family from South-East England were
celebrating Christmas at a beach resort in southern
Thailand. Tilly Smith was a ten-year-old schoolgirl; her
sister was seven years old. Their parents were Penny
and Colin Smith.
It was 26 December 2004. Deadly tsunami waves
were already on their way. They had been triggered
by a massive earthquake off northern Sumatra earlier
that morning.
“The water was swelling and kept coming in,” Penny
Smith remembered. “The beach was getting smaller and
smaller. I didn’t know what was happening.”
But Tilly Smith sensed that something was wrong.
Her mind kept going back to a geography lesson she
had taken in England just two weeks before she flew
out to Thailand with her family.
Tilly saw the sea slowly rise, and start to foam, bubble
and form whirlpools. She remembered that she had seen
this in class in a video of a tsunami that had hit the
Hawaiian islands in 1946. Her geography teacher had
shown her class the video, and told them that tsunamis
can be caused by earthquakes, volcanoes and landslides.
Tilly started to scream at her family to get off the
beach. “She talked about an earthquake under the sea.
She got more and more hysterical,” said her mother
Penny. “I didn’t know what a tsunami was. But seeing
my daughter so frightened, I thought something serious
must be going on.”
Tilly’s parents took her and her sister away from the
beach, to the swimming pool at the hotel. A number of
other tourists also left the beach with them. “Then it
was as if the entire sea had come out after them. I was
screaming, ‘Run!’”
The family took refuge in the third floor of the hotel.
The building withstood the surge of three tsunami waves.
If they had stayed on the beach, they would not have
been alive.
The Smiths later met other tourists who had lost
entire families. Thanks to Tilly and her geography lesson,
they had been forewarned. Tilly went back to her school
in England and told her classmates her terrifying tale.
Before the giant waves slammed into the coast in
India and Sri Lanka, wild and domestic animals seemed
to know what was about to happen. They fled to safety.
According to eyewitness accounts, elephants screamed
and ran for higher ground; dogs refused to go outdoors;
flamingoes abandoned their low-lying breeding areas;
and zoo animals rushed into their shelters and could
not be enticed to come back out.
Many people believe that animals possess a sixth
sense and know when the earth is going to shake. Some
experts believe that animals’ more acute hearing helps
them to hear or feel the earth’s vibration. They can sense
an approaching disaster long before humans realise
what’s going on.
We cannot be sure whether animals have a sixth
sense or not. But the fact is that the giant waves that
rolled through the Indian Ocean killed more than
150,000 people in a dozen countries; but not many
animals have been reported dead.
Along India’s Cuddalore coast, where thousands of
people perished, buffaloes, goats and dogs were found
unharmed. The Yala National Park in Sri Lanka is home
to a variety of animals including elephants, leopards,
and 130 species of birds. Sixty visitors were washed
away from the Patanangala beach inside the park; but
no animal carcasses were found, except for two water
buffaloes. About an hour before the tsunami hit, people
at Yala National Park had observed three elephants
running away from the Patanangala beach.
A Sri Lankan gentleman who lives on the coast near
Galle said his two dogs would not go for their daily run
on the beach. “They are usually excited to go on this
outing,” he said. But on that day they refused to go,
and most probably saved his life.;


Geography Lesson

When the jet sprang into the sky,
it was clear why the city
had developed the way it had,
seeing it scaled six inches to the mile.
There seemed an inevitability
about what on ground had looked haphazard,
unplanned and without style
When the jet sprang into the sky.
When the jet reached ten thousand feet,
it was clear why the country
had cities where the rivers ran
and why the valleys were populated.
The logic of geography —
that land and water attracted man —
was clearly delineated
When the jet reached ten thousand feet.
When the jet rose six miles high,
it was clear the earth was round
and that it had more sea than land.
But it was difficult to understand
that the men on the earth found
causes to hate each other, to build
walls across cities and to kill.
From that height, it was not clear why.
-ZULFIKAR GHOSE;

Bepin Choudhury's Lapse of Memory

Every Monday, on his way back from work, Bepin
Choudhury would drop in at Kalicharan's in New Market
to buy books. Crime stories, ghost stories and thrillers.
He had to buy at least five at a time to last him through
the week. He lived alone, was not a good mixer, had few
friends, and didn’t like spending time in idle chat. Today,
at Kalicharan’s, Bepin Babu had the feeling that
someone was observing him from close quarters. He
turned round and found himself looking at a round
faced, meek looking man who now broke into a smile.
“I don’t suppose you recognise me.”
“Have we met before?” asked Bepin Babu.
The man looked greatly surprised. “We met every day for a
whole week. I arranged for a car to take you to the Hudroo falls.
In 1958. In Ranchi. My name is Parimal Ghose.”
“Ranchi?”
Now Bepin Babu realised that it was not he but this
man who was making a mistake. Bepin Babu had never
been to Ranchi. He had been at the point of going several
times, but never made it. He smiled and said, “Do you
know who I am?”
The man raised his eyebrows, bit his tongue and
said, “Do I know you? Who doesn’t know Bepin
Choudhury?”
Bepin Babu now turned towards the bookshelves and
said, “Still you’re making a mistake. One often does.
I’ve never been to Ranchi.”
The man now laughed aloud.
“What are you saying, Mr Choudhury? You had a
fall in Hudroo and cut your right knee. I brought you
iodine. I hadfixed up a car for you to go to Netarhat the
next day, but you couldn’t because of the pain in the
knee. Can’t you recall anything? Someone else you know
was also in Ranchi at that time. Mr Dinesh Mukerji.
You stayed in a bungalow. You said you didn’t like hotel
food and would prefer to have your meals cooked by a
bawarchi. Mr Mukerji stayed with his sister. You had a
big argument about the moon landing, remember? I’ll
tell you more: you always carried a bag with your books
in it on your sight-seeing trips. Am I right or not?”
Bepin Babu spoke quietly, his eyes still on the books.
“Which month in ’58 are you talking about?”
The man said, “October.”
“No, sir,” said Bepin Babu. “I spent Puja in ’58 with
a friend in Kanpur. You’re making a mistake. Good day.”
But the man didn’t go, nor did he stop talking.
“Very strange. One evening I had tea with you in a
veranda of your bungalow. You spoke about your family.
You said you had no children, and that you had lost
your wife ten years ago. Your only brother had died
insane, which is why you didn’t want to visit the mental
hospital in Ranchi...”
When Bepin Babu had paid for the books and was
leaving the shop, the man was still looking at him in
utter disbelief.
Bepin Babu’s car was safely parked in Bertram Street
by the Lighthouse Cinema. He told the driver as he got
into the car, “Just drive by the Ganga, will you, Sitaram.”
Driving up the Strand Road, Bepin Babu regretted
having paid so much attention to the intruder. He had
never been to Ranchi — no question about it. It was
inconceivable that he should forget such an incident
which took place only six or seven years ago. He had an
excellent memory. Unless — Bepin Babu’s head reeled.
Was he losing his mind? But how could that be? He
was working daily in his office. It was a big firm, and he
was doing a responsible job. He wasn’t aware of anything
ever going seriously wrong. Only today he spoke for
half an hour at an important meeting. And yet...
And yet the man knew a great deal about him. How?
He even seemed to know some intimate details. The bag
of books, wife’s death, brother’s insanity... The only
mistake was about his having gone to Ranchi. Not a
mistake; a deliberate lie. In ’58, during the Pujas, he
was in Kanpur at his friend Haridas Bagchi’s place.
All Bepin Babu had to do was write to — no, there was
no way of writing to Haridas. Bepin Babu suddenly
remembered that Haridas had left with his wife for Japan
some weeks ago, and he didn’t have his address.
But where was the need for proof? He himself was
fully aware that he hadn’t been to Ranchi — and that
was that.
The river breeze was bracing, and yet a slight
discomfort lingered in Bepin Babu’s mind.
Around Hastings, Bepin Babu decided to roll up his
trousers and take a look at his right knee.
There was the mark of an old inch-long cut. It was
impossible to tell when the injury had occurred.

Had he never had a fall as a boy and cut his knee? He
tried to recall such an incident, but couldn’t.
Then Bepin Babu suddenly thought of Dinesh
Mukerji. The man had said that Dinesh was in Ranchi
at the same time. The best thing surely would be to ask
him. He lived quite near — in Beninandan Street. What
about going right now? But then, if he had really never
been to Ranchi, what would Dinesh think if Bepin Babu
asked for a confirmation? He would probably conclude
Bepin Babu was going nuts. No; it would be ridiculous
to ask him.
And he knew how ruthless Dinesh’s sarcasm
could be.
Sipping a cold drink in his air-conditioned living
room, Bepin Babu felt at ease again. Such a nuisance!
Just because they have nothing else to do, they go about
getting into other people’s hair.
After dinner, snuggling in bed with one of the new
thrillers, Bepin Babu forgot all about the man in New
Market.
Next day, in the office, Bepin Babu noticed that with
every passing hour, the previous day’s encounter was
occupying more and more of his mind. If the man knew
so much about Bepin Babu, how could he make such a
mistake about the Ranchi trip?
Just before lunch Bepin Babu decided to ring up
Dinesh Mukerji. It was better to settle the question over
the phone; at least the embarrassment on his face
wouldn’t show.
Two-Three-Five-Six-One-Six. Bepin Babu dialled
the number.
“Hallo.”
“Is that Dinesh? This is Bepin here.”
“Well, well — what’s the news?”
“I just wanted to find out if you recalled an incident
which took place in’ 58.”
“’58? What incident?”
“Were you in Calcutta right through that year? That’s
the first thing I’ve got to know.”
“Wait just a minute... ’58... just let me check in
my diary.”
For a minute there was silence. Bepin Babu could
feel that his heartbeat had gone up. He was sweating
a little.
“Hallo.”
“Yes.”
“I've got it. I’d been out twice.”
“Where?”
“Once in February — nearby — to Krishnanagar to a
nephew’s wedding. And then... but you’d know about
this one. The trip to Ranchi. You were there too. That’s
all. But what’s all this sleuthing about?”
“No. I just wanted to — anyway, thanks.”
Bepin Babu slammed the receiver down and gripped
his head with his hands. He felt his head swimming. A
chill seemed to spread over his body. There were
sandwiches in his tiffin box, but he didn’t eat them. He
had lost his appetite.

After lunch-time, Bepin Babu realised that he couldn’t
possibly carry on sitting at his desk and working. This
had never happened in the twenty-five years he had
been with the firm. He had a reputation for being a
tireless, conscientious worker. But today his head was
in a whirl.
Back home at two-thirty, Bepin Babu lay down in
bed and tried to gather his wits together. He knew that
it was possible to lose one’s memory through an injury
in the head, but he didn’t know of a single instance of
someone remembering everything except one particular
incident — and a fairly recent and significant one at
that. He had always wanted to go to Ranchi; to have
gone there, done things, and not to remember was
something utterly impossible.
At seven thirty, Bepin Babu’s servant came and
announced, “Chuni Babu, sir. Says it’s very important.”
Bepin Babu knew what Chuni had come for. Chunilal
had been at school with him. He’d been having a rough
time lately and had been coming to see him about a
job. Bepin Babu knew it was not possible to do anything
for him and, in fact, told him so. But Chuni kept turning
up like a bad penny.
Bepin Babu sent word that not only was it not
possible for him to see Chuni now, but not in several
weeks.
But as soon as the servant stepped out of the room,
it struck Bepin Babu that Chuni might remember
something about the ’58 trip. There was no harm in
asking him.
Bepin Babu hurried down the stairs and into the
living room. Chuni was about to leave, but seeing Bepin
Babu appear, he turned round hopefully.
Bepin Babu didn’t beat about the bush.
“Listen, Chuni - I want to ask you something. You
have a good memory, and you've been seeing me off
and on for a long time. Just throw your mind back and
tell me - did I go to Ranchi in ’58?”
Chuni said, “’58? It must have been ’58. Or was it
’59?”

“You’re sure that I did go to Ranchi?”
Chuni’s look of amazement was not unmixed with
worry.
“D’ you mean you have doubts about having gone at
all?”
“Did I go? Do you remember clearly?”
Chuni sat down on the sofa, fixed Bepin Babu with
a long, hard stare and said, “Bepin, have you taken to
drugs or something? As far as I know, you had a clean
record where such things were concerned. I know that
old friendships don’t mean much to you, but at least
you had a good memory. You can’t really mean that
you’ve forgotten about the Ranchi trip?”
Bepin Babu had to turn away from Chuni’s
incredulous stare.
“Do you remember what my last job was?” asked
Chunilal.
“Of course. You worked in a travel agency.”
“You remember that and you don’t remember that it
was I who fixed up your railway booking for Ranchi? I
went to the station to see you off; one of the fans in
your compartment was not working — I got an electrician
to fix it. Have you forgotten everything? Whatever is the
matter with you? You don’t look too well, you know.”
Bepin Babu sighed and shook his head.
“I’ve been working too hard,” he said at last. “That
must be the reason. Must see about consulting a
specialist.”
Doubtless it was Bepin’s condition which made
Chunilal leave without mentioning anything about a job.
Paresh Chanda was a young physician with a pair of
bright eyes and a sharp nose. He became thoughtful
when he heard about Bepin Babu’s symptoms. “Look,
Dr Chanda,” said Bepin Babu desperately, “You must
cure me of this horrible illness. I can’t tell you how it's
affecting my work.”
Dr Chanda shook his head.
“You know what, Mr Choudhury,” he said. “I’ve never
had to deal with a case such as yours. Frankly, this is
quite outside my field of experience. But I have one
suggestion. I don’t know if it’ll work, but it’s worth a
try. It can do no harm.”
Bepin Babu leaned forward anxiously.
“As far as I can make out,” said Dr Chanda, “And I
think you’re of the same opinion — you must have been
to Ranchi, but due to some unknown reason, the entire
episode has slipped out of your mind. What I suggest is
that you go to Ranchi once again. The sight of the place
may remind you of your trip. This is not impossible.
More than that I cannot do at the moment. I’m
prescribing a nerve tonic and a tranquilliser. Sleep is
essential, or the symptoms will get more pronounced.”
Bepin Babu felt somewhat better the next morning.
After breakfast, he rang up his office, gave some
instructions and then procured a first class ticket for
Ranchi for the same evening.
Getting off the train at Ranchi next morning, he realised
at once that he had never been there before.
He came out of the station, took a taxi and drove
around the town for a while. He realised that the streets,
the buildings, the hotels, the bazaars, the Morabadi Hill
— with none of these had he the slightest acquaintance.
Would a trip to the Hudroo Falls help? He didn't believe
so, but, at the same time, he didn't wish to leave with the
feeling that he hadn’t tried enough. So he arranged for a
car and left for Hudroo in the afternoon.

At five o’clock the same afternoon in Hudroo, two
Gujarati gentlemen from a group of picnickers discovered
Bepin Babu lying unconscious beside a boulder. When
he came round, the first thing Bepin Babu said was,
“I’m finished. There’s no hope left.”
Next morning, Bepin Babu was back in Calcutta. He
realised that there was truly no hope for him. Soon he
would lose everything: his will to work, his confidence,
his ability, his balance of mind. Was he going to end up
in the asylum at...? Bepin Babu couldn’t think any more.
Back home, he rang up Dr Chanda and asked him to
come over. Then, after a shower, he got into bed with an
ice bag clamped on his head. Just then the servant brought
him a letter which someone had left in the letter box.
A greenish envelope with his name in red ink on it.
Above the name it said ‘Urgent and Confidential’. In
spite of his condition, Bepin Babu had a feeling that he
ought to go through the letter. He tore open the envelope
and took out the letter. This is what he read —
'Dear Bepin,
I had no idea that affluence would bring about the kind of change in
you that it has done. Was it so difficult for you to help out an old friend
down on his luck? I have no money, so my resources are limited.
What I have is imagination, a part of which I used in retribution of your
unfeeling behaviour.
Well, you’ll be all right again now. A novel I’ve written is being
considered by a publisher. If he likes it enough, it'll see me through the
next few months.'

When Dr Chanda came, Bepin Babu said, “I’m fine.
It all came back as soon as I got off the train at Ranchi.”
“A unique case,” said Dr Chanda. “I shall certainly
write about it in a medical journal.”
“The reason why I sent for you,” said Bepin Babu, “is
that I have a pain in the hip from a fall I had in Ranchi.
If you could prescribe a pain killer…”;


The Last Bargain

“Come and hire me,” I cried, while in the morning
I was walking on the stone-paved road.
Sword in hand the King came in his chariot.
He held my hand and said, “I will hire you with
my power,”
But his power counted for naught, and he went away in
his chariot.
In the heat of the mid-day the houses stood with
shut doors.
I wandered along the crooked lane.
An old man came out with his bag of gold.
He pondered and said, “I will hire you with my money.”
He weighed his coins one by one, but I turned away.

It was evening. The garden hedge was all aflower.
The fair maid came out and said, “I will hire you with
a smile.”
Her smile paled and melted into tears, and she went
back alone into the dark.
The sun glistened on the sand, and the sea waves broke
waywardly.
A child sat playing with shells.
He raised his head and seemed to know me and said,
“I hire you with nothing.”
From henceforward that bargain struck in child’s play
made me a free man.
-RABINDRANATH TAGORE;
_________________________________________________________________VIII-I


The Summit Within
Of all the emotions which surged through me as I stood
on the summit of Everest, looking over miles of
panorama below us, the dominant one I think was
humility. The physical in me seemed to say, ‘Thank
God, it’s all over!” However, instead of being jubilant,
there was a tinge of sadness. Was it because I had already
done the ‘ultimate’ in climbing and there would be
nothing higher to climb and all roads hereafter would
lead down?
By climbing the summit of Everest you are
overwhelmed by a deep sense of joy and thankfulness.
It is a joy which lasts a lifetime. The experience changes
you completely. The man who has been to the mountains
is never the same again.
As I look back at life after climbing Everest I cannot
help remarking about the other summit — the summit
of the mind — no less formidable and no easier to climb.
Even when getting down from the summit, once the
physical exhaustion had gone, I began asking myself
the question why I had climbed Everest. Why did the
act of reaching the summit have such a hold on my
imagination? It was already a thing of the past,
something done yesterday. With every passing day, it
would become more remote. And then what would
remain? Would my memories fade slowly away?
All these thoughts led me to question myself as
to why people climb mountains. It is not easy to
answer the question. The simplest answer would be,
as others have said, “Because it is there.” It presents
great difficulties. Man takes delight in overcoming
obstacles. The obstacles in climbing a mountain are
physical. A climb to a summit means endurance,
persistence and will power. The demonstration of
these physical qualities is no doubt exhilarating, as
it was for me also.
I have a more personal answer to the question. From
my childhood I have been attracted by mountains. I
had been miserable, lost, when away from mountains,
in the plains. Mountains are nature at its best. Their
beauty and majesty pose a great challenge, and like
many, I believe that mountains are a means of
communion with God.
Once having granted this, the question remains: Why
Everest? Because it is the highest, the mightiest and
has defied many previous attempts. It takes the last
ounce of one’s energy. It is a brutal struggle with rock
and ice. Once taken up, it cannot be given up halfway
even when one’s life is at stake. The passage back is as
difficult as the passage onwards. And then, when the
summit is climbed, there is the exhilaration, the joy of
having done something, the sense of a battle fought
and won. There is a feeling of victory and of happiness.
Glimpsing a peak in the distance, I get transported
to another world. I experience a change within myself
which can only be called mystical. By its beauty,
aloofness, might, ruggedness, and the difficulties
encountered on the way, the peak draws me to it — as
Everest did. It is a challenge that is difficult to resist.
Looking back I find that I have not
yet fully explained why I climbed
Everest. It is like answering a question
why you breathe. Why do you help your
neighbour? Why do you want to do good
acts? There is no final answer possible.
And then there is the fact that Everest
is not just a physical climb. The man who
has been to the mountain-top becomes
conscious in a special manner of his own
smallness in this large universe.
The physical conquest of a mountain
is only one part of the achievement.
There is more to it than that. It is
followed by a sense of fulfilment. There
is the satisfaction of a deep urge to rise
above one’s surroundings. It is the
eternal love for adventure in man. The experience is not
merely physical. It is emotional. It is spiritual.
Consider a typical climb, towards the summit on the
last heights. You are sharing a rope with another
climber. You firm in. He cuts the steps in the hard ice.
Then he belays and you inch your way up. The climb is
grim. You strain every nerve as you take every step.
Famous climbers have left records of the help given by
others. They have also recorded how they needed just
that help. Else they might have given up. Breathing is
difficult. You curse yourself for having let yourself in for
this. You wonder why you ever undertook the ascent.
There are moments when you feel like going back. It
would be sheer relief to go down, instead of up. But
almost at once you snap out of that mood. There is
something in you that does not let you give up the
struggle. And you go on. Your companion keeps up with
you. Just another fifty feet. Or a hundred, maybe. You
ask yourself: Is there no end? You look at your
companion and he looks at you. You draw inspiration
from each other. And then, without first being aware of
it, you are at the summit.
Looking round from the summit you tell yourself
that it was worthwhile. Other silvery peaks appear
through the clouds. If you are lucky the sun may be on
them. The surrounding peaks look like a jewelled
necklace around the neck of your summit. Below, you
see vast valleys sloping into the distance. It is an
ennobling, enriching experience to just look down from
the summit of a mountain. You bow down and make
your obeisance to whichever God you worship.
I left on Everest a picture of Guru Nanak. Rawat left
a picture of Goddess Durga. Phu Dorji left a relic of the
Buddha. Edmund Hillary had buried a cross under a
cairn (a heap of rocks and stones) in the snow. These
are not symbols of conquest but of reverence.
The experience of having
climbed to the summit
changes you completely.
There is another summit.
It is within yourself. It is in
your own mind. Each man
carries within himself his
own mountain peak. He
must climb it to reach to a
fuller knowledge of himself.
It is fearful, and unscalable.
It cannot be climbed by
anyone else. You yourself
have to do it. The physical
act of climbing to the
summit of a mountain
outside is akin to the act of climbing the mountain
within. The effects of both the climbs are the same.
Whether the mountain you climb is physical or
emotional and spiritual, the climb will certainly change
you. It teaches you much about the world and about
yourself.
I venture to think that my experience as an Everester
has provided me with the inspiration to face life’s ordeals
resolutely. Climbing the mountain was a worthwhile
experience. The conquest of the internal summit is
equally worthwhile. The internal summits are, perhaps,
higher than Everest.
-H.P.S. AHLUWALIA;

The School Boy

I love to rise in a summer morn,
When the birds sing on every tree;
The distant huntsman winds his horn,
And the skylark sings with me.
O! what sweet company.
But to go to school in a summer morn,
O! it drives all joy away;
Under a cruel eye outworn,
The little ones spend the day,
In sighing and dismay.
Ah! then at times I drooping sit,
And spend many an anxious hour.
Nor in my book can I take delight,
Nor sit in learning’s bower,
Worn thro’ with the dreary shower.
How can the bird that is born for joy,
Sit in a cage and sing.
How can a child when fears annoy,
But droop his tender wing,
And forget his youthful spring.
O! Father and Mother, if buds are nip’d,
And blossoms blown away,
And if the tender plants are strip’d
Of their joy in the springing day,
By sorrow and cares dismay,
How shall the summer arise in joy,
Or the summer fruits appear?
-WILLIAM BLAKE
Glossary: 
nip’d: (nipped) ‘to nip something in the bud’ is to stop or
destroy it at an early stage of its development
strip’d: stripped
plants strip’d of joy: if joy is taken away from plants;


This is Jody's Farm

Jody allowed his thoughts to drift back to the fawn. He
could not keep it out of his mind. He had held it, in his
dreams, in his arms. He slipped from the table and went
to his father’s bedside. Penny lay at rest. His eyes were
open and clear, but the pupils were still dark and dilated.
Jody said, “How are you feeling, Pa?”
“Just fine, son. Old Death has gone thieving elsewhere.
But wasn’t it a close shave!”
“I agree.”
Penny said, “I’m proud of you, boy, the way you kept
your head and did what was needed.”
“Pa-”
“Yes, son.”
“Pa, do you recollect the doe and the fawn?”
“I can never forget them. The poor doe saved me,
that’s certain.”
“Pa, the fawn may be out there yet. It might be hungry
and very scared.”
“I suppose so.”
“Pa, I’m a big boy now and don’t need to drink milk.
Why don’t I go and see if I can find the fawn?”
“And bring it here?”
“And raise it.”
Penny lay quiet, staring at the ceiling.
“Boy, you’ve got me hemmed in.”
“It won’t take much to raise it, Pa. It’ll soon start
eating leaves and acorns.”
“You are smarter than boys of your age.”
“We took its mother, and it wasn’t to blame.”
“Surely it seems ungrateful to leave it to starve. Son, I can’t
say ‘No’ to you. I never thought I’d live to see another day.”
“Can I ride back with Mill-wheel and see if I can
find it?”
“Tell your Ma I said you can go.”
He sidled back to the table and sat down. His mother
was pouring coffee for everyone.
He said, “Ma, Pa says I can go bring back the fawn.”
She held the coffee pot in mid-air.
“What fawn?”
“The fawn belonging to the doe we killed. We used
the doe’s liver to draw out the poison and save Pa.”
She gasped.
“Well, for pity sake—”
“Pa says it would be ungrateful to leave it to starve.”
Doc Wilson said, “That’s right, Ma’am. Nothing in
the world comes quite free. The boy’s right and his
daddy’s right.”
Mill-wheel said, “He can ride back with me. I’ll help
him find it.”
She set down the pot helplessly.
“Well, if you’ll give it your milk—we’ve got nothing
else to feed it.”
Mill-wheel said,
“Come on, boy. We’ve got
to get riding.”
Ma Baxter asked
anxiously, “You’ll not be
gone long?”
Jody said, “I’ll be back
before dinner for sure. ”
Mill-wheel mounted
his horse and pulled
Jody up behind him.
He said to Mill-wheel,
“Do you think the fawn’s
still there? Will you help
me find him?”
“We’ll find him if he’s alive. How you know it’s a he?”
“The spots were all in a line. On a doe-fawn, Pa says
the spots are every which way…”
Jody gave himself over to thoughts of the fawn. They
passed the abandoned clearing.
He said, “Cut to the north, Mill-wheel. It was up here
that Pa got bitten by the snake and killed the doe and I
saw the fawn.”
Suddenly Jody was unwilling to have Mill-wheel with
him. If the fawn was dead, or could not be found, he
could not have his disappointment seen. And if the fawn
was there, the meeting would be so lovely and so secret
that he could not endure to share it.
He said, “It’s not far now, but the scrub is very thick
for a horse. I can make it on foot.”
“But I’m afraid to leave you, boy. Suppose you got
lost or got bitten by the snake, too?”
“I’ll take care. It might take me a long time to find
the fawn, if he’s wandered. Leave me off right here.”
“All right, but you take it easy now. You know north
here, and east?”
“There, and there. That tall pine makes a bearing.”
“So long.”
“So long, Mill-wheel. I’m obliged.”
He waited for the sound of the hooves to end, then
cut to the right. The scrub was still. Only his own
crackling of twigs sounded across the silence. He
wondered for an instant if he had mistaken his direction.
Then a buzzard rose in front of him and flapped into
the air. He came into the clearing under the oaks.
Buzzards sat in a circle around the carcass of the doe.
They turned their heads on their long scrawny necks
and hissed at him. He threw his bough at them and
they flew into an adjacent tree. The sand showed large
cat prints but the big cats killed fresh, and they had left
the doe to the carrion birds.
He parted the grass at the place where he had seen
the fawn. It did not seem possible that it was only
yesterday. The fawn was not there. He circled the
clearing. There was no sound, no sign. The buzzards
clacked their wings, impatient to return to their
business. He returned to the spot where the fawn had
emerged and dropped on all fours, studying the sand
for the small hoof prints. The night’s rain had washed
away all tracks except those of cat and buzzards.
Movement directly in front of him startled him so that
he tumbled backward. The fawn lifted its face to his. It
turned its head with a wide, wondering motion and
shook him through with the stare of its liquid eyes. It
was quivering. It made no effort to rise or run. Jody
could not trust himself to move.
He whispered, “It’s me.”
The fawn lifted its nose, scenting him. He reached
out one hand and laid it on the soft neck. The touch
made him delirious. He moved forward on all fours until
he was close beside it. He put his arms around its body.
A light convulsion passed over it but it did not stir.
He stroked its
sides as gently
as though the
fawn were a
china deer and
he might break
it. Its skin was
very soft. It was
sleek and clean
and had a
sweet scent of
grass. He rose
slowly and
lifted the fawn
from the ground. Its legs hung limply. They were
surprisingly long and he had to hoist the fawn as high
as possible under his arm.
He was afraid that it might kick and bleat at sight
and smell of its mother. He skirted the clearing and
pushed his way into the thicket. It was difficult to fight
through with his burden. The fawn’s legs caught in the
bushes and he could not lift his own with freedom. He
tried to shield its face from prickling vines. Its head
bobbed with his stride. His heart thumped with the
marvel of its acceptance of him. He reached the trail
and walked as fast as he could until he came to the
intersection with the road home. He stopped to rest and
set the fawn down on its dangling legs. It wavered on
them. It looked at him and bleated.
He said, enchanted, “I’ll carry you after I get my breath.”
He remembered his father saying that a fawn would
follow if it had first been carried. He started away slowly.
The fawn stared after him. He came back to it and
stroked it and walked away again. It took a few wobbling
steps toward him and cried piteously. It was willing to
follow him. It belonged to him. It was his own. He was
light-headed with his joy. He wanted to fondle it, to run
and romp with it, to call to it to come to him. He dared
not alarm it. He picked it up and carried it in front of
him over his two arms. It seemed to him that he walked
without effort.
His arms began to ache and he was forced to stop
again. When he walked on, the fawn followed him at
once. He allowed it to walk a little distance, then picked
it up again. The distance home was nothing. He could
have walked all day and into the night, carrying it and
watching it follow. He was wet with sweat but a light
breeze blew through the June morning, cooling him.
The sky was as clear as spring water in a blue china
cup. He came to the clearing. It was fresh and green
after the night’s rain. He fumbled with the latch and
was finally obliged to set down the fawn to manage it.
Then, he had an idea — he would walk into the house,
into Penny’s bedroom, with the fawn walking behind
him. But at the steps, the fawn balked and refused to
climb them. He picked it up and went to his father.
Penny lay with closed eyes.
Jody called, “Pa! Look!”
Penny turned his head. Jody stood beside him, the
fawn clutched hard against him. It seemed to Penny
that the boy’s eyes were as bright as the fawn’s. He
said, “I’m glad you found him.”
Jody then went to the kitchen. The fawn wobbled
after him. A pan of morning’s milk stood in the kitchen
safe. The cream had risen on it. He skimmed the cream
into a jug. He poured milk into a small gourd. He held
it out to the fawn. It butted it suddenly, smelling the
milk. He saved it precariously from spilling over the
floor. It could make nothing of the milk in the gourd.
He dipped his fingers in the milk and thrust them
into the fawn’s soft wet mouth. It sucked greedily. When
he withdrew them, it bleated frantically and butted him.
He dipped his fingers again and as the fawn sucked, he
lowered them slowly into the milk. The fawn blew and
sucked and snorted. It stamped its small
hoofs impatiently. As long as he held
his fingers below the level of the milk,
the fawn was content. It closed its
eyes dreamily. It was ecstasy to feel
its tongue against his hand. Its
small tail flicked back and forth.
The last of the milk vanished in
a swirl of foam and gurgling.
-MARJORIE KINNAN RAWLINGS;


A visit to Cambridge
Cambridge was my metaphor for England, and it was
strange that when I left it had become altogether something
else, because I had met Stephen Hawking there.
It was on a walking tour through Cambridge that
the guide mentioned Stephen Hawking, ‘poor man, who
is quite disabled now, though he is a worthy successor
to Issac Newton, whose Chair he has at the university.’
And I started, because I had quite forgotten that this
most brilliant and completely paralysed astrophysicist,
the author of A Brief History of Time, one of
the biggest best-sellers ever, lived here.
When the walking tour was done, I rushed
to a phone booth and, almost tearing the cord
so it could reach me outside, phoned Stephen
Hawking’s house. There was his assistant on
the line and I told him I had come in a
wheelchair from India (perhaps he thought I
had propelled myself all the way) to write
about my travels in Britain. I had to see
Professor Hawking — even ten minutes would
do. “Half an hour,“ he said. “From three-thirty
to four.”
And suddenly I felt weak all over. Growing up
disabled, you get fed up with people asking you to be
brave, as if you have a courage account on which you
are too lazy to draw a cheque. The only thing that
makes you stronger is seeing somebody like you,
achieving something huge. Then you know how much
is possible and you reach out further than you ever
thought you could.
“I haven’t been brave,” said his disembodied
computer-voice, the next afternoon. “I’ve had no choice.”
Surely, I wanted to say, living creatively with the
reality of his disintegrating body was a choice? But I
kept quiet, because I felt guilty every time I spoke to
him, forcing him to respond. There he was, tapping at
the little switch in his hand, trying to find the words on
his computer with the only bit of movement left to him,
his long, pale fingers. Every so often, his eyes would
shut in frustrated exhaustion. And sitting opposite him
I could feel his anguish, the mind buoyant with thoughts
that came out in frozen phrases and sentences stiff as
corpses.
“A lot of people seem to think that disabled people
are chronically unhappy,” I said. “I know that’s not true
myself. Are you often laughing inside?”
About three minutes later, he responded, “I find it
amusing when people patronise me.”
“And do you find it annoying when someone like me
comes and disturbs you in your work?”
The answer flashed. “Yes.” Then he smiled his oneway
smile and I knew, without being sentimental or
silly, that I was looking at one of the most beautiful
men in the world.
A first glimpse of him is shocking, because he is like a
still photograph — as if all those pictures of him in
magazines and newspapers have turned three-dimensional.
Then you see the head twisted sideways into a slump,
the torso shrunk inside the pale blue shirt, the wasted
legs; you look at his eyes which can speak, still, and
they are saying something huge and urgent — it is hard
to tell what. But you are shaken because you have seen
something you never thought could be seen.
Before you, like a lantern whose walls are worn so
thin you glimpse only the light inside, is the
incandescence of a man. The body, almost irrelevant,
exists only like a case made of shadows. So that I, no
believer in eternal souls, know that this is what each of
us is; everything else an accessory.
“What do you think is the best thing about being
disabled?” I had asked him earlier.
“I don’t think there is anything good about being disabled.”
“I think,” I said, “you do discover how much kindness
there is in the world.”
“Yes,” he said; it was a disadvantage of his voice
synthesiser that it could convey no inflection, no shades
or tone. And I could not tell how enthusiastically he
agreed with me.
Every time I shifted in my chair or turned my wrist
to watch the time — I wanted to make every one of our
thirty minutes count — I felt a huge relief and
exhilaration in the possibilities of my body. How little it
mattered then that I would never walk, or even stand.
I told him how he had been an inspiration beyond
cliche´ for me, and, surely, for others — did that thought
help him?
“No,” he said; and I thought how foolish I was to ask.
When your body is a claustrophobic room and the walls
are growing narrower day by day, it doesn’t do much
good to know that there are people outside smiling with
admiration to see you breathing still.
“Is there any advice you can give disabled people,
something that might help make life better?”
“They should concentrate on what they are good at; I
think things like the disabled Olympics are a waste of time.”
“I know what you mean.” I remembered the years I’d
spent trying to play a Spanish guitar considerably larger
than I was; and how gleefully I had unstringed it one night.
The half-hour was up. “I think I’ve annoyed you
enough,” I said, grinning. “Thank you for...”
“Stay.” I waited. “Have some tea. I can show you the garden.”
The garden was as big as a park, but Stephen
Hawking covered every inch, rumbling along in his
motorised wheelchair while I dodged to keep out of the
way. We couldn’t talk very much; the sun made
him silent, the letters on his screen
disappearing in the glare.
An hour later, we were ready to leave. I didn’t
know what to do. I could not kiss him or cry. I
touched his shoulder and wheeled out into the
summer evening. I looked back; and I knew he
was waving, though he wasn’t. Watching him,
an embodiment of my bravest self, the one I
was moving towards, the one I had believed in
for so many years, alone, I knew that my
journey was over. For now.
-FIRDAUS KANGA
from Heaven on Wheels;

A Short Monsoon Diary
Here are a few extracts from Ruskin Bond’s diary in
which he portrays the silent miracles of nature and
life’s little joys and regrets. Read on.

June 24
The first day of monsoon mist. And it’s strange how all
the birds fall silent as the mist comes climbing up the
hill. Perhaps that’s what makes the mist so melancholy;
not only does it conceal the hills, it blankets them in
silence too. Only an hour ago the trees were ringing
with birdsong. And now the forest is deathly still as
though it were midnight.
Through the mist Bijju is calling to his sister. I can
hear him running about on the hillside but I cannot
see him.


June 25
Some genuine earlymonsoon
rain, warm
and humid, and not
that cold high-altitude
stuff we’ve been having
all year. The plants
seem to know it too,
and the first cobra lily
rears its head from the
ferns as I walk up to the
bank and post office.
The mist affords a
certain privacy.
A school boy asked
me to describe the hill
station and valley in
one sentence, and all I could say was: “A paradise that
might have been.”
June 27
The rains have heralded the arrival of some seasonal
visitors—a leopard, and several thousand leeches.
Yesterday afternoon the leopard lifted a dog from near
the servants’ quarter below the school. In the evening it
attacked one of Bijju’s cows but fled at the approach of
Bijju’s mother, who came screaming imprecations.
As for the leeches, I shall soon get used to a little
bloodletting every day.
Other new arrivals are the scarlet minivets (the
females are yellow), flitting silently among the leaves
like brilliant jewels. No matter how leafy the trees, these
brightly coloured birds cannot conceal themselves,
although, by remaining absolutely silent, they
sometimes contrive to go unnoticed. Along come a pair
of drongos, unnecessarily aggressive, chasing the
minivets away.
A tree creeper moves rapidly up the trunk of the
oak tree, snapping up insects all the way. Now that
the rains are here, there is no dearth of food for the
insectivorous birds.

August 2
All night the rain has been drumming on the
corrugated tin roof. There has been no storm, no
thunder, just the steady swish of a tropical downpour.
It helps me to lie awake; at the same time, it doesn’t
keep me from sleeping.
It is a good sound to read by — the rain outside, the
quiet within — and, although tin roofs are given to
springing unaccountable leaks, there is a feeling of being
untouched by, and yet in touch with, the rain
August 3
The rain stops. The clouds begin to break up, the sun
strikes the hill on my left. A woman is chopping up
sticks. I hear the tinkle of cowbells. In the oak tree, a
crow shakes the raindrops from his feathers and caws
disconsolately. Water drips from a leaking drainpipe.
And suddenly, clean and pure, the song of the whistling
thrush emerges like a dark sweet secret from the depths
of the ravine.
August 12
Endless rain, and a permanent mist. We haven’t seen
the sun for eight or nine days. Everything damp and
soggy. Nowhere to go. Pace the room, look out of the
window at a few bobbing umbrellas. At least it isn’t cold
rain. The hillsides are lush
as late-monsoon flowers
begin to appear — wild
balsam, dahlias, begonias
and ground orchids.
August 31
It is the last day of August,
and the lush monsoon
growth has reached its
peak. The seeds of the
cobra lily are turning red,
signifying that the rains are coming to an end.
In a few days the ferns will start turning yellow, but
right now they are still firm, green and upright. Ground
orchids, mauve lady’s slipper and the white butterfly
orchids put on a fashion display on the grassy slopes of
Landour. Wild dahlias, red, yellow and magenta, rear
their heads from the rocky crevices where they have
taken hold.
Snakes and rodents, flooded out of their holes and
burrows, take shelter in roofs, attics and godowns. A
shrew, weak of eyesight, blunders about the rooms,
much to the amusement of the children.
“Don’t kill it,” admonishes their grandmother.
“Chuchundars are lucky — they bring money!”
And sure enough, I receive a cheque in the mail. Not
a very large one, but welcome all the same.
October 3
We have gone straight from monsoon into winter rain.
Snow at higher altitudes.
After an evening hailstorm, the sky and hills are
suffused with a beautiful golden light.

January 26
Winter Rains in the Hills
In the hushed silence of the house
when I am quite alone, and my friend,
who was here
has gone, it is very lonely, very quiet,
as I sit in a liquid silence, a silence
within,
surrounded by the rhythm of rain,
the steady drift
of water on leaves, on lemons, on roof,
drumming on drenched dahlias and
window panes,
while the mist holds the house in a dark
caress.
As I pause near a window, the rain stops.
And starts again.
And the trees, no longer green but grey,
menace me with their loneliness.
March 23
Late March. End of winter.
The blackest cloud I’ve ever seen squatted over
Mussoorie, and then it hailed marbles for half an hour.
Nothing like a hailstorm to clear the sky. Even as I write,
I see a rainbow forming.
-RUSKIN BOND;

On the Grasshopper and Cricket

this
is a nature poem. In it, the grasshopper and cricket do not appear
as characters in a story. Rather, they act as symbols, each
suggesting something else. Read the poem and notice how ‘the
poetry of earth’ keeps on through summer and winter in a neverending
song. Who sings the song?
The poetry of earth is never dead:
When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead,
That is the grasshopper’s — he takes the lead
In summer luxury — he has never done
With his delights, for when tired out with fun
He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
On a lone winter evening when the frost
Has wrought a silence, from the stone there shrills
The cricket’s song, in warmth increasing ever,
And seems to one in drowsiness half lost;
The grasshopper’s among some grassy hills.
-JOHN KEATS

Glossary 
wrought: brought about
shrills: comes through loud and clear ;
_________________________________________________________________VIII-II

The Fun they had

1. MARGIE even wrote about it that night in her diary.
On the page headed 17 May 2157, she wrote, “Today
Tommy found a real book!”
It was a very old book. Margie’s grandfather once
said that when he was a little boy his grandfather
told him that there was a time when all stories
were printed on paper.
They turned the pages, which were yellow and
crinkly, and it was awfully funny to read words
that stood still instead of moving the way they were
supposed to — on a screen, you know. And then
when they turned back to the page before, it had
the same words on it that it had had when they
read it the first time.
2. “Gee,” said Tommy, “what a waste. When you’re
through with the book, you just throw it away, I
guess. Our television screen must have had a million
books on it and it’s good for plenty more. I wouldn’t
throw it away.”
“Same with mine,” said Margie. She was eleven
and hadn’t seen as many telebooks as Tommy had.
He was thirteen.
She said, “Where did you find it?”
“In my house.” He pointed without looking,
because he was busy reading. “In the attic.”
“What’s it about?”
“School.”
3. Margie was scornful. “School? What’s there to write
about school? I hate school.”
Margie always hated school, but now she hated
it more than ever. The mechanical teacher had been
giving her test after test in geography and she had
been doing worse and worse until her mother had
shaken her head sorrowfully and sent for the County
Inspector.
4. He was a round little man with a red face and a
whole box of tools with dials and wires. He smiled
at Margie and gave her an apple, then took the
teacher apart. Margie had hoped he wouldn’t know
how to put it together again, but he knew how all
right, and, after an hour or so, there it was again,
large and black and ugly, with a big screen on which
all the lessons were shown and the questions were
asked. That wasn’t so bad. The part Margie hated
most was the slot where she had to put homework
and test papers. She always had to write them out
in a punch code they made her learn when she was
six years old, and the mechanical teacher calculated
the marks in no time.
5. The Inspector had smiled after he was finished and
patted Margie’s head. He said to her mother, “It’s
not the little girl’s fault, Mrs Jones. I think the
geography sector was geared a little too quick. Those
things happen sometimes. I’ve slowed it up to an
average ten-year level. Actually, the overall pattern
of her progress is quite satisfactory.” And he patted
Margie’s head again.
Margie was disappointed. She had been hoping
they would take the teacher away altogether. They
had once taken Tommy’s teacher away for nearly a
month because the history sector had blanked out
completely.
So she said to Tommy, “Why would anyone write
about school?”
6. Tommy looked at her with very superior eyes.
“Because it’s not our kind of school, stupid. This is
the old kind of school that they had hundreds and
hundreds of years ago.” He added loftily,
pronouncing the word carefully, “Centuries ago.”
Margie was hurt. “Well, I don’t know what
kind of school they had all that time ago.” She read
the book over his shoulder for a while, then said,
“Anyway, they had a teacher.”
“Sure they had a teacher, but it wasn’t a regular
teacher. It was a man.”
“A man? How could a man be a teacher?”
“Well, he just told the boys and girls things and
gave them homework and asked them questions.”
7. “A man isn’t smart enough.”
“Sure he is. My father knows as much as my
teacher.”
“He knows almost as much, I betcha.”
Margie wasn’t prepared to dispute that. She said,
“I wouldn’t want a strange man in my house to
teach me.”
Tommy screamed with laughter. “You don’t know
much, Margie. The teachers didn’t live in the
house. They had a special building and all the
kids went there.”
“And all the kids learned the same thing?”
“Sure, if they were the same age.”
8. “But my mother says a teacher has to be adjusted to
fit the mind of each boy and girl it teaches and that
each kid has to be taught differently.”
“Just the same they didn’t do it that way then.
If you don’t like it, you don’t have to read the book.”
“I didn’t say I didn’t like it,” Margie said quickly.
She wanted to read about those funny schools.
They weren’t even half finished when Margie’s
mother called, “Margie! School!”
Margie looked up. “Not yet, Mamma.”
“Now!” said Mrs Jones. “And it’s probably time
for Tommy, too.”
Margie said to Tommy, “Can I read the book some
more with you after school?”
9. “May be,” he said nonchalantly. He walked away
whistling, the dusty old book tucked beneath
his arm.
Margie went into the schoolroom. It was right
next to her bedroom, and the mechanical teacher
was on and waiting for her. It was always on at the
same time every day except Saturday and Sunday,
because her mother said little girls learned better
if they learned at regular hours.
The screen was lit up, and it said: “Today’s
arithmetic lesson is on the addition of proper
fractions. Please insert yesterday’s homework in the
proper slot.”
10. Margie did so with a sigh. She was thinking about
the old schools they had when her grandfather’s
grandfather was a little boy. All the kids from the
whole neighborhood came, laughing and shouting
in the schoolyard, sitting together in the schoolroom,
going home together at the end of the day. They
learned the same things, so they could help one
another with the homework and talk about it.
And the teachers were people…
The mechanical teacher was flashing on the
screen: “When we add fractions ½ and ¼...”
Margie was thinking about how the kids must
have loved it in the old days. She was thinking
about the fun they had.
-ISAAC ASIMOV;


The Road Not Taken


Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,
And sorry I could not travel both
And be one traveller, long I stood
And looked down one as far as I could
To where it bent in the undergrowth;
Then took the other, just as fair,
And having perhaps the better claim,
Because it was grassy and wanted wear;
Though as for that the passing there
Had worn them really about the same.
And both that morning equally lay
In leaves no step had trodden black.
Oh, I kept the first for another day!
Yet knowing how way leads on to way,
I doubted if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh
Somewhere ages and ages hence;
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I —
I took the one less travelled by,
And that has made all the difference.
-ROBERT FROST


GLOSSARY
diverged: separated and took a different direction
undergrowth: dense growth of plants and bushes
wanted wear: had not been used
hence: here, in the future;


The Sound of Music

RUSH hour crowds jostle for position on the
underground train platform. A slight girl, looking
younger than her seventeen years, was nervous yet
excited as she felt the vibrations of the approaching
train. It was her first day at the prestigious Royal
Academy of Music in London and daunting enough
for any teenager fresh from a Scottish farm. But
this aspiring musician faced a bigger challenge than
most: she was profoundly deaf.
2. Evelyn Glennie’s loss of hearing had been gradual.
Her mother remembers noticing something was
wrong when the eight-year-old Evelyn was waiting
to play the piano. “They called her name and she
didn’t move. I suddenly realised she hadn’t heard,”
says Isabel Glennie. For quite a while Evelyn
managed to conceal her growing deafness from
friends and teachers. But by the time she was
eleven her marks had deteriorated and her
headmistress urged her parents to take her to a
specialist. It was then discovered that her hearing
was severely impaired as a result of gradual nerve
damage. They were advised that she should be fitted
with hearing aids and sent to a school for the deaf.
“Everything suddenly looked black,” says Evelyn.
3. But Evelyn was not going to give up. She was
determined to lead a normal life and pursue her
interest in music. One day she noticed a girl playing
a xylophone and decided that she wanted to play it
too. Most of the teachers discouraged her but
percussionist Ron Forbes spotted her potential. He
began by tuning two large drums to different notes.
“Don’t listen through your ears,” he would say, “try
to sense it some other way.” Says Evelyn, “Suddenly
I realised I could feel the higher drum from the
waist up and the lower one from the waist down.”
Forbes repeated the exercise, and soon Evelyn
discovered that she could sense certain notes in
different parts of her body. “I had learnt to open my
mind and body to sounds and vibrations.” The rest
was sheer determination and hard work.
4. She never looked back from that point onwards.
She toured the United Kingdom with a youth
orchestra and by the time she was sixteen, she had
decided to make music her life. She auditioned for
the Royal Academy of Music and scored one of the
highest marks in the history of the academy. She
gradually moved from orchestral work to solo
performances. At the end of her three-year course,
she had captured most of the top awards.
5. And for all this, Evelyn won’t accept any hint of
heroic achievement. “If you work hard and know
where you are going, you’ll get there.” And she got
right to the top, the world’s most sought-after multipercussionist
with a mastery of some thousand
instruments, and hectic international schedule.
6. It is intriguing to watch Evelyn function so
effortlessly without hearing. In our two-hour
discussion she never missed a word. “Men with
bushy beards give me trouble,” she laughed. “It is
not just watching the lips, it’s the whole face,
especially the eyes.” She speaks flawlessly with a
Scottish lilt. “My speech is clear because I could
hear till I was eleven,” she says. But that doesn’t
explain how she managed to learn French and
master basic Japanese.
7. As for music, she explains, “It pours in through
every part of my body. It tingles in the skin, my
cheekbones and even in my hair.” When she plays
the xylophone, she can sense the sound passing up
the stick into her fingertips. By leaning against the
drums, she can feel the resonances flowing into her
body. On a wooden platform she removes her shoes
so that the vibrations pass through her bare feet
and up her legs.
not just watching the lips, it’s the whole face,
especially the eyes.” She speaks flawlessly with a
Scottish lilt. “My speech is clear because I could
hear till I was eleven,” she says. But that doesn’t
explain how she managed to learn French and
master basic Japanese.
7. As for music, she explains, “It pours in through
every part of my body. It tingles in the skin, my
cheekbones and even in my hair.” When she plays
the xylophone, she can sense the sound passing up
the stick into her fingertips. By leaning against the
drums, she can feel the resonances flowing into her
body. On a wooden platform she removes her shoes
so that the vibrations pass through her bare feet
and up her legs.
Not surprisingly, Evelyn delights her audiences. In
1991 she was presented with the Royal
Philharmonic Society’s prestigious Soloist of the Year
Award. Says master percussionist James Blades,
“God may have taken her hearing but he has given
her back something extraordinary. What we hear,
she feels — far more deeply than any of us. That is
why she expresses music so beautifully.”
9. Evelyn confesses that she is something of a
workaholic. “I’ve just got to work . . . often harder
than classical musicians. But the rewards are
enormous.” Apart from the regular concerts, Evelyn
also gives free concerts in prisons and hospitals.
She also gives high priority to classes for young
musicians. Ann Richlin of the Beethoven Fund for
Deaf Children says, “She is a shining inspiration
for deaf children. They see that there is nowhere
that they cannot go.”
10. Evelyn Glennie has already accomplished more than
most people twice her age. She has brought
percussion to the front of the orchestra, and
demonstrated that it can be very moving. She has
given inspiration to those who are handicapped,
people who look to her and say, ‘If she can do it, I
can.’ And, not the least, she has given enormous
pleasure to millions.
-DEBORAH COWLEY;


The Shenai of Bismillah Khan
EMPEROR Aurangzeb banned the playing of a musical
instrument called pungi in the royal residence for
it had a shrill unpleasant sound. Pungi became the
generic name for reeded noisemakers. Few had
thought that it would one day be revived. A barber
of a family of professional musicians, who had access
to the royal palace, decided to improve the tonal
quality of the pungi. He chose a pipe with a natural
hollow stem that was longer and broader than the
pungi, and made seven holes on the body of the
pipe. When he played on it, closing and opening
some of these holes, soft and melodious sounds were
2. The sound of the shehnai began to be considered
auspicious. And for this reason it is still played in
temples and is an indispensable component of any
North Indian wedding. In the past, the shehnai was
part of the naubat or traditional ensemble of nine
instruments found at royal courts. Till recently it
was used only in temples and weddings. The credit
for bringing this instrument onto the classical stage
goes to Ustad Bismillah Khan.
3. As a five-year old, Bismillah Khan played gilli-danda
near a pond in the ancient estate of Dumraon in
Bihar. He would regularly go to the nearby Bihariji
temple to sing the Bhojpuri ‘Chaita’, at the end of
which he would earn a big laddu weighing 1.25 kg,
a prize given by the local Maharaja. This happened
80 years ago, and the little boy has travelled far to
earn the highest civilian award in India — the
Bharat Ratna.
4. Born on 21 March 1916, Bismillah belongs to a
well-known family of musicians from Bihar. His
grandfather, Rasool Bux Khan, was the shehnainawaz
of the Bhojpur king’s court. His father,
Paigambar Bux, and other paternal ancestors were
also great shehnai players.
The young boy took to music early in life. At the age of
three when his mother took him to his maternal
uncle’s house in Benaras (now Varanasi), Bismillah
was fascinated watching his uncles practise the
shehnai. Soon Bismillah started accompanying his
uncle, Ali Bux, to the Vishnu temple of Benaras where
Bux was employed to play the shehnai. Ali Bux would
play the shehnai and Bismillah would sit captivated
for hours on end. Slowly, he started getting lessons
in playing the instrument and would sit practising
throughout the day. For years to come the temple of
Balaji and Mangala Maiya and the banks of the Ganga
became the young apprentice’s favourite haunts where
he could practise in solitude. The flowing waters of
the Ganga inspired him to improvise and invent raagas
that were earlier considered to be beyond the range
of the shehnai.
At the age of 14, Bismillah accompanied his uncle
to the Allahabad Music Conference. At the end of
his recital, Ustad Faiyaz Khan patted the young
boy’s back and said, “Work hard and you shall make
it.” With the opening of the All India Radio in
Lucknow in 1938 came Bismillah’s big break. He
soon became an often-heard shehnai player on radio.
7. When India gained independence on 15 August 1947,
Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to greet the
nation with his shehnai. He poured his heart out
into Raag Kafi from the Red Fort to an audience
which included Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who later
gave his famous ‘Tryst with Destiny’ speech.
8. Bismillah Khan has given many memorable
performances both in India and abroad. His first
trip abroad was to Afghanistan where King Zahir
Shah was so taken in by the maestro that he gifted
him priceless Persian carpets and other souvenirs.
The King of Afghanistan was not the only one to be
fascinated with Bismillah’s music. Film director
Vijay Bhatt was so impressed after hearing
Bismillah play at a festival that he named a film
after the instrument called Gunj Uthi Shehnai. The
film was a hit, and one of Bismillah Khan’s
compositions, “Dil ka khilona hai toot gaya...,” turned
out to be a nationwide chartbuster! Despite this
huge success in the celluloid world, Bismillah
Khan’s ventures in film music were limited to two:
Vijay Bhatt’s Gunj Uthi Shehnai and Vikram
Srinivas’s Kannada venture, Sanadhi Apanna. “I just
can’t come to terms with the artificiality and
glamour of the film world,” he says with emphasis.
9. Awards and recognition came thick and fast.
Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to be invited
to perform at the prestigious Lincoln Centre Hall in
the United States of America. He also took part in
the World Exposition in Montreal, in the Cannes
Art Festival and in the Osaka Trade Fair. So well
known did he become internationally that an
auditorium in Teheran was named after him —
Tahar Mosiquee Ustaad Bismillah Khan.
10. National awards like the Padmashri, the Padma
Bhushan and the Padma Vibhushan were
conferred on him.
11. In 2001, Ustad Bismillah Khan was awarded India’s
highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna. With the
coveted award resting on his chest and his eyes
glinting with rare happiness he said, “All I would
like to say is: Teach your children music, this is
Hindustan’s richest tradition; even the West is now
coming to learn our music.’’
12. In spite of having travelled all over the world —
Khansaab as he is fondly called — is exceedingly
fond of Benaras and Dumraon and they remain for
him the most wonderful towns of the world. A
student of his once wanted him to head a shehnai
school in the U.S.A., and the student promised to
recreate the atmosphere of Benaras by replicating
the temples there. But Khansaab asked him if he
would be able to transport River Ganga as well.
Later he is remembered to have said, “That is why
whenever I am in a foreign country, I keep yearning
to see Hindustan. While in Mumbai, I think of only
Benaras and the holy Ganga. And while in Benaras,
I miss the unique mattha of Dumraon.”
SHEKHAR GUPTA: When Partition happened, didn’t you and your
family think of moving to Pakistan?
BISMILLAH KHAN: God forbid! Me, leave Benaras? Never! I went
to Pakistan once—I crossed the border just to say I have been
to Pakistan. I was there for about an hour. I said namaskar
to the Pakistanis and salaam alaikum to the Indians! I had a
good laugh.
Ustad Bismillah Khan’s life is a perfect example of
the rich, cultural heritage of India, one that
effortlessly accepts that a devout Muslim like him
can very naturally play the shehnai every morning
at the Kashi Vishwanath temple.
[Ustad Bismillah Khan passed away on 21 August 2006 at
the age of ninety after a prolonged illness. He was given a
state funeral and the Government of India declared one day
of national mourning.];

Wind


Wind, come softly.
Don’t break the shutters of the windows.
Don’t scatter the papers.
Don’t throw down the books on the shelf.
There, look what you did — you threw them all down.
You tore the pages of the books.
You brought rain again.
You’re very clever at poking fun at weaklings.
Frail crumbling houses, crumbling doors, crumbling rafters,
crumbling wood, crumbling bodies, crumbling lives,
crumbling hearts —
the wind god winnows and crushes them all.
He won’t do what you tell him.
So, come, let’s build strong homes,
Let’s joint the doors firmly.
Practise to firm the body.
Make the heart steadfast.
Do this, and the wind will be friends with us.
The wind blows out weak fires.
He makes strong fires roar and flourish.
His friendship is good.
We praise him every day.
-SUBRAMANIA BHARATI
[translated from the Tamil by
A.K. Ramanujan]


GLOSSARY
poking fun: making fun of
rafters: sloping beams supporting a roof
winnow: blow grain free of chaff; separate grain from husk by blowing on it;


The Little Girl

TO the little girl he was a figure to be feared and
avoided. Every morning before going to work he came
into her room and gave her a casual kiss, to which
she responded with “Goodbye, Father”. And oh,
there was a glad sense of relief when she heard the
noise of the carriage growing fainter and fainter
down the long road!
In the evening when he came home she stood
near the staircase and heard his loud voice in the
hall. “Bring my tea into the drawing-room... Hasn’t
the paper come yet? Mother, go and see if my paper’s
out there — and bring me my slippers.”
2. “Kezia,” Mother would call to her, “if you’re a good
girl you can come down and take off father’s boots.”
Slowly the girl would slip down the stairs, more
slowly still across the hall, and push open the
drawing-room door.
By that time he had his spectacles on and looked
at her over them in a way that was terrifying to
the little girl.
“Well, Kezia, hurry up and pull off these boots
and take them outside. Have you been a good
girl today?”
“I d-d-don’t know, Father.”
“You d-d-don’t know? If you stutter like that
Mother will have to take you to the doctor.”
3. She never stuttered with other people — had quite
given it up — but only with Father, because then
she was trying so hard to say the words properly.
“What’s the matter? What are you looking so
wretched about? Mother, I wish you taught this child
not to appear on the brink of suicide... Here, Kezia,
carry my teacup back to the table carefully.”
He was so big — his hands and his neck,
especially his mouth when he yawned. Thinking
about him alone was like thinking about a giant.
4. On Sunday afternoons Grandmother sent her down
to the drawing-room to have a “nice talk with Father
and Mother”. But the little girl always found Mother
reading and Father stretched out on the sofa, his
handkerchief on his face, his feet on one of the best
cushions, sleeping soundly and snoring.
She sat on a stool, gravely watched him until he
woke and stretched, and asked the time — then
looked at her.
“Don’t stare so, Kezia. You look like a little
brown owl.”
One day, when she was kept indoors with a cold,
her grandmother told her that father’s birthday was
next week, and suggested she should make him a
pin-cushion for a gift out of a beautiful piece of
yellow silk.
5. Laboriously, with a double cotton, the little girl
stitched three sides. But what to fill it with? That
was the question. The grandmother was out in the
garden, and she wandered into Mother’s bedroom
to look for scraps. On the bed-table she discovered
a great many sheets of fine paper, gathered them
up, tore them into tiny pieces, and stuffed her case,
then sewed up the fourth side.
That night there was a hue and cry in the house.
Father’s great speech for the Port Authority had
been lost. Rooms were searched; servants
questioned. Finally Mother came into Kezia’s room.
“Kezia, I suppose you didn’t see some papers on
a table in our room?”
“Oh yes,” she said, “I tore them up for my
surprise.”
“What!” screamed Mother. “Come straight down
to the dining-room this instant.”
6. And she was dragged down to where Father was
pacing to and fro, hands behind his back.
“Well?” he said sharply.
Mother explained.
He stopped and stared at the child.
“Did you do that?”
“N-n-no”, she whispered.
“Mother, go up to her room and fetch down the
damned thing — see that the child’s put to bed
this instant.”
Crying too much to explain, she lay in the shadowed
room watching the evening light make a sad little
pattern on the floor.
Then Father came into the room with a ruler in
his hands.
“I am going to beat you for this,” he said.
“Oh, no, no”, she screamed, hiding under the
bedclothes.
He pulled them aside.
“Sit up,” he ordered, “and hold out your hands.
You must be taught once and for all not to touch
what does not belong to you.”
“But it was for your b-b-birthday.”
Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms.
8. Hours later, when Grandmother had wrapped her
in a shawl and rocked her in the rocking-chair, the
child clung to her soft body.
“What did God make fathers for?” she sobbed.
“Here’s a clean hanky, darling. Blow your nose.
Go to sleep, pet; you’ll forget all about it in the
morning. I tried to explain to Father but he was too
upset to listen tonight.”
But the child never forgot. Next time she saw
him she quickly put both hands behind her back
and a red colour flew into her cheeks.
9. The Macdonalds lived next door. They had five
children. Looking through a gap in the fence the
little girl saw them playing ‘tag’ in the evening.
The father with the baby, Mao, on his shoulders,
two little girls hanging on to his coat pockets
ran round and round the flower-beds, shaking
with laughter. Once she saw the boys turn the
hose on him—and he tried to catch them laughing
all the time.
Then it was she decided there were different
sorts of fathers.
Suddenly, one day, Mother became ill, and she
and Grandmother went to hospital.
The little girl was left alone in the house with
Alice, the cook. That was all right in the daytime,
but while Alice was putting her to bed she grew
suddenly afraid.
10. “What’ll I do if I have a nightmare?” she asked. “I
often have nightmares and then Grannie takes me
into her bed—I can’t stay in the dark—it all gets
‘whispery’…”
“You just go to sleep, child,” said Alice, pulling
off her socks, “and don’t you scream and wake your
poor Pa.”
But the same old nightmare came — the butcher
with a knife and a rope, who came nearer and
nearer, smiling that dreadful smile, while she could
not move, could only stand still, crying out,
“Grandma! Grandma!” She woke shivering to see
Father beside her bed, a candle in his hand.
“What’s the matter?” he said.
11. “Oh, a butcher — a knife — I want Grannie.” He
blew out the candle, bent down and caught up the
child in his arms, carrying her along the passage
to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed.
He put away the paper, then carefully tucked up
the child. He lay down beside her. Half asleep still,
still with the butcher’s smile all about her it seemed,
she crept close to him, snuggled her head under
his arm, held tightly to his shirt.
Then the dark did not matter; she lay still.
“Here, rub your feet against my legs and get
them warm,” said Father.
12. Tired out, he slept before the little girl. A funny feeling
came over her. Poor Father, not so big, after all —
and with no one to look after him. He was harder
than Grandmother, but it was a nice hardness. And
every day he had to work and was too tired to be a
Mr Macdonald… She had torn up all his beautiful
writing… She stirred suddenly, and sighed.
“What’s the matter?” asked her father. “Another
dream?”
“Oh,” said the little girl, “my head’s on your heart.
I can hear it going. What a big heart you’ve got,
Father dear.”
KATHERINE MANSFIELD;


Rain on the Roof

When the humid shadows hover
Over all the starry spheres
And the melancholy darkness
Gently weeps in rainy tears,
What a bliss to press the pillow
Of a cottage-chamber bed
And lie listening to the patter
Of the soft rain overhead!
Every tinkle on the shingles
Has an echo in the heart;
And a thousand dreamy fancies
Into busy being start,
And a thousand recollections
Weave their air-threads into woof,
As I listen to the patter
Of the rain upon the roof.
Now in memory comes my mother,
As she used in years agone,
To regard the darling dreamers
Ere she left them till the dawn:
O! I feel her fond look on me
As I list to this refrain
Which is played upon the shingles
By the patter of the rain.
-COATES KINNEY
GLOSSARY
tinkle: short, light ringing sounds
shingles: rectangular wooden tiles used on roofs
woof: weft, i.e. the threads woven across the loom
ere: old poetic word for ‘before’
refrain: a repeated part of a song or a poem; here, the sound of the rain
list: old poetic word for ‘listen’;

A Truly Beautiful Mind
ALBERT Einstein was born on 14 March 1879 in the
German city of Ulm, without any indication that he
was destined for greatness. On the contrary, his
mother thought Albert was a freak. To her, his head
seemed much too large.
2. At the age of two-and-a-half, Einstein still wasn’t
talking. When he finally did learn to speak, he uttered
everything twice. Einstein did not know what to do
with other children, and his playmates called him
“Brother Boring.” So the youngster played by himself much of the time. He especially loved mechanical
toys. Looking at his newborn sister, Maja, he is said
to have said: “Fine, but where are her wheels?”

Otto Neugebauer, the historian of ancient mathematics, told a
story about the boy Einstein that he characterises as a “legend”,
but that seems fairly authentic. As he was a late talker, his parents
were worried. At last, at the supper table one night, he broke his
silence to say, “The soup is too hot.” Greatly relieved, his parents
asked why he had never said a word before. Albert replied,
“Because up to now everything was in order.”
A headmaster once told his father that what
Einstein chose as a profession wouldn’t matter,
because “he’ll never make a success at anything.”
Einstein began learning to play the violin at the
age of six, because his mother wanted him to; he
later became a gifted amateur violinist, maintaining
this skill throughout his life.
4. But Albert Einstein was not a bad pupil. He went
to high school in Munich, where Einstein’s family
had moved when he was 15 months old, and scored
good marks in almost every subject. Einstein hated
the school’s regimentation, and often clashed with
his teachers. At the age of 15, Einstein felt so stifled
there that he left the school for good.
5. The previous year, Albert’s parents had moved to
Milan, and left their son with relatives. After prolonged
discussion, Einstein got his wish to continue his
education in German-speaking Switzerland, in a city
which was more liberal than Munich.
6. Einstein was highly gifted in mathematics and
interested in physics, and after finishing school,
he decided to study at a university in Zurich. But
science wasn’t the only thing that appealed to the
dashing young man with the walrus moustache.
He also felt a special interest in a fellow student,
Mileva Maric, whom he found to be a “clever
creature.” This young Serb had come to Switzerland
because the University in Zurich was one of the few
in Europe where women could get degrees. Einstein
saw in her an ally against the “philistines”—
those people in his family and at the university
with whom he was constantly at odds. The couple
fell in love. Letters survive in which they put their
affection into words, mixing science with
tenderness. Wrote Einstein: “How happy and proud
I shall be when we both have brought our work on
relativity to a victorious conclusion.”
8. In 1900, at the age of 21, Albert Einstein was a
university graduate and unemployed. He worked
as a teaching assistant, gave private lessons and
finally secured a job in 1902 as a technical expert
in the patent office in Bern. While he was supposed
to be assessing other people’s inventions, Einstein
was actually developing his own ideas in secret. He
is said to have jokingly called his desk drawer at
work the “bureau of theoretical physics.”
9. One of the famous papers of 1905 was Einstein’s
Special Theory of Relativity, according to which time
and distance are not absolute. Indeed, two perfectly
accurate clocks will not continue to show the same
time if they come together again after a journey if
one of them has been moving very fast relative to
the other. From this followed the world’s most
famous formula which describes the relationship
between mass and energy:
E = mc2
(In this mathematical equation, E stands for energy, m for mass
and c for the speed of the light in a vacuum (about 300,000 km/s).

Glossary:
ally: a friend or an
associate
philistines: a word
used disapprovingly
to talk about people
who do not like art,
literature or music
While Einstein was solving the most difficult
problems in physics, his private life was
unravelling. Albert had wanted to marry Mileva right
after finishing his studies, but his mother was
against it. She thought Mileva, who was three years
older than her son, was too old for him. She was
also bothered by Mileva’s intelligence. “She is a
book like you,” his mother said. Einstein put the
wedding off.
11. The pair finally married in January 1903, and had
two sons. But a few years later, the marriage
faltered. Mileva, meanwhile, was losing her
intellectual ambition and becoming an unhappy
housewife. After years of constant fighting, the
couple finally divorced in 1919. Einstein married
his cousin Elsa the same year.
Einstein’s new personal chapter coincided with his
rise to world fame. In 1915, he had published his
General Theory of Relativity, which provided a new
interpretation of gravity. An eclipse of the sun in
1919 brought proof that it was accurate. Einstein
had correctly calculated in advance the extent to
which the light from fixed stars would be deflected
through the sun’s gravitational field. The newspapers
proclaimed his work as “a scientific revolution.”
13. Einstein received the Nobel Prize for Physics in
1921. He was showered with honours and invitations
from all over the world, and lauded by the press.

14. When the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933,
Einstein emigrated to the United States. Five years
later, the discovery of nuclear fission in Berlin had
American physicists in an uproar. Many of them
had fled from Fascism, just as Einstein had, and
now they were afraid the Nazis could build and use
an atomic bomb.
15. At the urging of a colleague, Einstein wrote a letter
to the American President, Franklin D. Roosevelt,
on 2 August 1939, in which he warned: “A single
bomb of this type . . . exploded in a port, might very
well destroy the whole port together with some of
the surrounding territory.” His words did not fail to
have an effect. The Americans developed the atomic
bomb in a secret project of their own, and dropped
it on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
in August 1945.
16. Einstein was deeply shaken by the extent of the
destruction. This time he wrote a public missive to
the United Nations. In it he proposed the formation
of a world government. Unlike the letter to Roosevelt,
this one made no impact. But over the next decade,
Einstein got ever more involved in politics —
agitating for an end to the arms buildup and using
his popularity to campaign for peace and democracy.
17. When Einstein died in 1955 at the age of 76, he
was celebrated as a visionary and world citizen as
much as a scientific genius.;

The Lake Isle of Innisfree

I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree,
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made:
Nine bean-rows will I have there, a hive for the honeybee,
And live alone in the bee-loud glade.
And I shall have some peace there, for peace comes dropping slow
Dropping from the veils of the morning to where the cricket sings;
There midnight’s all a glimmer, and noon a purple glow,
And evenings full of the linnet’s wings.
I will arise and go now, for always night and day
I hear the lake water lapping with low sounds by the shore;
While I stand on the roadway, or on the pavements grey,
I hear it in the deep heart’s core.
-WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
GLOSSARY
wattles: twisted sticks for making fences, walls
glade: clearing; open space
linnet: a small brown and grey bird with a short beak;
______________________________________________________________________________________IX-I

The Snake and the Mirror

“HAS a snake ever coiled itself round any part of
your body? A full-blooded cobra?” All of us fell silent.
The question came from the homeopath. The topic
came up when we were discussing snakes. We
listened attentively as the doctor continued with
his tale.
It was a hot summer night; about ten o’clock. I had
my meal at the restaurant and returned to my room.
I heard a noise from above as I opened the door.
The sound was a familiar one. One could say that
the rats and I shared the room. I took out my box of
matches and lighted the kerosene lamp on the table.
2. The house was not electrified; it was a small rented
room. I had just set up medical practice and my
earnings were meagre. I had about sixty rupees in
my suitcase. Along with some shirts and dhotis, I
also possessed one solitary black coat which I was
then wearing.
3. I took off my black coat, white shirt and not-sowhite
vest and hung them up. I opened the two
windows in the room. It was an outer room with
one wall facing the open yard. It had a tiled roof
with long supporting gables that rested on the beam
over the wall. There was no ceiling. There was a
regular traffic of rats to and from the beam. I made
my bed and pulled it close to the wall. I lay down
but I could not sleep. I got up and went out to the
veranda for a little air, but the wind god seemed to
have taken time off.
4. I went back into the room and sat down on the
chair. I opened the box beneath the table and took
out a book, the Materia Medica. I opened it at the
table on which stood the lamp and a large mirror; a
small comb lay beside the mirror.
One feels tempted to look into a mirror when it is
near one. I took a look. In those days I was a great
admirer of beauty and I believed in making myself
look handsome. I was unmarried and I was a doctor.
I felt I had to make my presence felt. I picked up the
comb and ran it through my hair and adjusted the
parting so that it looked straight and neat.
Again I heard that sound from above.
5. I took a close look at my face in the mirror. I made
an important decision — I would shave daily and
grow a thin moustache to look more handsome. I
was after all a bachelor, and a doctor!
I looked into the mirror and smiled. It was an
attractive smile. I made another earth-shaking
decision. I would always keep that attractive smile
on my face . .. to look more handsome. I was after
all a bachelor, and a doctor too on top of it!
Again came that noise from above.
6. I got up, paced up and down the room. Then another
lovely thought struck me. I would marry.
I would get married to a woman doctor who had
plenty of money and a good medical practice. She
had to be fat; for a valid reason. If I made some silly
mistake and needed to run away she should not be
able to run after me and catch me!
With such thoughts in my mind I resumed my seat
in the chair in front of the table. There were no
more sounds from above. Suddenly there came a
dull thud as if a rubber tube had fallen to the
ground ... surely nothing to worry about. Even so I
thought I would turn around and take a look. No
sooner had I turned than a fat snake wriggled over
the back of the chair and landed on my shoulder.
The snake’s landing on me and my turning were
simultaneous.
7. I didn’t jump. I didn’t tremble. I didn’t cry out. There
was no time to do any such thing. The snake
slithered along my shoulder and coiled around my
left arm above the elbow. The hood was spread out
and its head was hardly three or four inches from
my face!
It would not be correct to say merely that I sat
there holding my breath. I was turned to stone. But
my mind was very active. The door opened into
darkness. The room was surrounded by darkness.
In the light of the lamp I sat there like a stone
image in the flesh.
8. I felt then the great presence of the creator of this
world and this universe. God was there. Suppose I
said something and he did not like it . . .
I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters
outside my little heart the words, ‘O God’.
There was some pain in my left arm. It was as if a
thick leaden rod — no, a rod made of molten fire —
was slowly but powerfully crushing my arm. The
arm was beginning to be drained of all strength.
What could I do?
9. At my slightest movement the snake would strike
me! Death lurked four inches away. Suppose it
struck, what was the medicine I had to take? There
were no medicines in the room. I was but a poor,
foolish and stupid doctor. I forgot my danger and
smiled feebly at myself.
It seemed as if God appreciated that. The snake
turned its head. It looked into the mirror and saw
its reflection. I do not claim that it was the first
snake that had ever looked into a mirror. But it
was certain that the snake was looking into the
mirror. Was it admiring its own beauty? Was it trying

to make an important decision about growing a
moustache or using eye shadow and mascara or
wearing a vermilion spot on its forehead?
10. I did not know anything for certain. What sex was
this snake, was it male or female? I will never know;
for the snake unwound itself from my arm and slowly
slithered into my lap. From there it crept onto the
table and moved towards the mirror. Perhaps it
wanted to enjoy its reflection at closer quarters.
I was no mere image cut in granite. I was suddenly
a man of flesh and blood. Still holding my breath I
got up from the chair. I quietly went out through
the door into the veranda. From there I leapt into
the yard and ran for all I was worth.
“Phew !” Each of us heaved a sigh of relief. Somebody
asked, “Doctor, is your wife very fat?”
11. “No,” the doctor said. “God willed otherwise. My life
companion is a thin reedy person with the gift of a
sprinter.”
Someone else asked, “Doctor, when you ran did the
snake follow you?”
The doctor replied, “I ran and ran till I reached
a friend’s house. Immediately I smeared oil all over
myself and took a bath. I changed into fresh clothes.
The next morning at about eight-thirty I took my
friend and one or two others to my room to move
my things from there. But we found we had little to
carry. Some thief had removed most of my things.
The room had been cleaned out! But not really, the
thief had left behind one thing as a final insult!’
12. “What was that?” I asked.
The doctor said, “My vest, the dirty one. The
fellow had such a sense of cleanliness...! The rascal
could have taken it and used it after washing it
with soap and water.”
“Did you see the snake the next day, doctor?”
The doctor laughed, “I’ve never seen it since. It
was a snake which was taken with its own beauty!”
VAIKOM MUHAMMAD BASHEER
[translated from the Malayalam
by V. Abdulla];

A Legend of the Northland

Away, away in the Northland,
Where the hours of the day are few,
And the nights are so long in winter
That they cannot sleep them through;
Where they harness the swift reindeer
To the sledges, when it snows;
And the children look like bear’s cubs
In their funny, furry clothes:
They tell them a curious story —
I don’t believe ’tis true;
And yet you may learn a lesson
If I tell the tale to you.
Once, when the good Saint Peter
Lived in the world below,
And walked about it, preaching,
Just as he did, you know,
He came to the door of a cottage,
In travelling round the earth,
Where a little woman was making cakes,
And baking them on the hearth;
And being faint with fasting,
For the day was almost done,
He asked her, from her store of cakes,
To give him a single one.

So she made a very little cake,
But as it baking lay,
She looked at it, and thought it seemed
Too large to give away.
Therefore she kneaded another,
And still a smaller one;
But it looked, when she turned it over,
As large as the first had done.
Then she took a tiny scrap of dough,
And rolled and rolled it flat;
And baked it thin as a wafer —
But she couldn’t part with that.
For she said, “My cakes that seem too small
When I eat of them myself
Are yet too large to give away.”
So she put them on the shelf.
Then good Saint Peter grew angry,
For he was hungry and faint;
And surely such a woman
Was enough to provoke a saint.
And he said, “You are far too selfish
To dwell in a human form,
To have both food and shelter,
And fire to keep you warm.
Now, you shall build as the birds do,
And shall get your scanty food
By boring, and boring, and boring,
All day in the hard, dry wood.”
Then up she went through the chimney,
Never speaking a word,
And out of the top flew a woodpecker,
For she was changed to a bird.
She had a scarlet cap on her head,
And that was left the same;
But all the rest of her clothes were burned
Black as a coal in the flame.
And every country schoolboy
Has seen her in the wood,
Where she lives in the trees till this very day,
Boring and boring for food.
-PHOEBE CARY
GLOSSARY:
legend: old traditional story
Saint Peter: an apostle of Christ
provoke: make angry	;

My Childhood

I WAS born into a middle-class Tamil family in the
island town of Rameswaram in the erstwhile Madras
State. My father, Jainulabdeen, had neither much
formal education nor much wealth; despite these
disadvantages, he possessed great innate wisdom
and a true generosity of spirit. He had an ideal
helpmate in my mother, Ashiamma. I do not recall
the exact number of people she fed every day, but I
am quite certain that far more outsiders ate with
us than all the members of our own family
put together.
2. I was one of many children — a short boy with
rather undistinguished looks, born to tall and
handsome parents. We lived in our ancestral house,
which was built in the middle of the nineteenth
century. It was a fairly large pucca house, made of
limestone and brick, on the Mosque Street in
Rameswaram. My austere father used to avoid all
inessential comforts and luxuries. However, all
necessities were provided for, in terms of food,
medicine or clothes. In fact, I would say mine
was a very secure childhood, both materially
and emotionally.
The Second World War broke out in 1939, when I
was eight years old. For reasons I have never been
able to understand, a sudden demand for tamarind
seeds erupted in the market. I used to collect the
seeds and sell them to a provision shop on Mosque
Street. A day’s collection would fetch me the princely
sum of one anna. My brother-in-law Jallaluddin
would tell me stories about the War which I would
later attempt to trace in the headlines in Dinamani.
Our area, being isolated, was completely unaffected
by the War. But soon India was forced to join the
Allied Forces and something like a state of
emergency was declared. The first casualty came
in the form of the suspension of the train halt at
Rameswaram station. The newspapers now had to
be bundled and thrown out from the moving train
on the Rameswaram Road between Rameswaram
and Dhanuskodi. That forced my cousin Samsuddin,
who distributed newspapers in Rameswaram , to
look for a helping hand to catch the bundles and, as
if naturally, I filled the slot. Samsuddin helped me
earn my first wages. Half a century later, I can still
feel the surge of pride in earning my own money for
the first time.
4. Every child is born, with some inherited
characteristics, into a specific socio-economic and
emotional environment, and trained in certain ways
by figures of authority. I inherited honesty and selfdiscipline
from my father; from my mother, I
inherited faith in goodness and deep kindness and
so did my three brothers and sister. I had three
close friends in my childhood — Ramanadha Sastry,
Aravindan and Sivaprakasan. All these boys were
from orthodox Hindu Brahmin families. As children,
none of us ever felt any difference amongst ourselves
because of our religious differences and upbringing.
In fact, Ramanadha Sastry was the son of Pakshi
Lakshmana Sastry, the high priest of the
Rameswaram temple. Later, he took over the
priesthood of the Rameswaram temple from his
father; Aravindan went into the business of
arranging transport for visiting pilgrims; and
Sivaprakasan became a catering contractor for the
Southern Railways.
5. During the annual Shri Sita Rama Kalyanam
ceremony, our family used to arrange boats with a
special platform for carrying idols of the Lord from
the temple to the marriage site, situated in the
middle of the pond called Rama Tirtha which was
near our house. Events from the Ramayana and
from the life of the Prophet were the bedtime stories
my mother and grandmother would tell the children
in our family.
6. One day when I was in the fifth standard at the
Rameswaram Elementary School, a new teacher
came to our class. I used to wear a cap which
marked me as a Muslim, and I always sat in the
front row next to Ramanadha Sastry, who wore the
sacred thread. The new teacher could not stomach
a Hindu priest’s son sitting with a Muslim boy. In
accordance with our social ranking as the new
teacher saw it, I was asked to go and sit on the
back bench. I felt very sad, and so did Ramanadha
Sastry. He looked utterly downcast as I shifted to
my seat in the last row. The image of him weeping
when I shifted to the last row left a lasting
impression on me.
7. After school, we went home and told our respective
parents about the incident. Lakshmana Sastry
summoned the teacher, and in our presence, told
the teacher that he should not spread the poison of
social inequality and communal intolerance in the
minds of innocent children. He bluntly asked the
teacher to either apologise or quit the school and
the island. Not only did the teacher regret his
behaviour, but the strong sense of conviction
Lakshmana Sastry conveyed ultimately reformed
this young teacher.
On the whole, the small society of Rameswaram
was very rigid in terms of the segregation of different
social groups. However, my science teacher
Sivasubramania Iyer, though an orthodox Brahmin
with a very conservative wife, was something of a
rebel. He did his best to break social barriers so
that people from varying backgrounds could mingle
easily. He used to spend hours with me and would
say, “Kalam, I want you to develop so that you
are on par with the highly educated people of the
big cities.”
9. One day, he invited me to his home for a meal. His
wife was horrified at the idea of a Muslim boy being
invited to dine in her ritually pure kitchen. She
refused to serve me in her kitchen. Sivasubramania
Iyer was not perturbed, nor did he get angry
with his wife, but instead, served me with
his own hands and sat down beside me to eat his
meal. His wife watched us from behind the kitchen
door. I wondered whether she had observed any
difference in the way I ate rice, drank water or
cleaned the floor after the meal. When I was leaving
his house, Sivasubramania Iyer invited me to join
him for dinner again the next weekend. Observing
my hesitation, he told me not to get upset, saying,
“Once you decide to change the system, such
problems have to be confronted.” When I visited his
house the next week, Sivasubramania Iyer’s wife
took me inside her kitchen and served me food with
her own hands.
10. Then the Second World War was over and India’s
freedom was imminent. “Indians will build their
own India,” declared Gandhiji. The whole country
was filled with an unprecedented optimism. I asked
my father for permission to leave Rameswaram
and study at the district headquarters in
Ramanathapuram.
He told me as if thinking aloud, “Abul ! I know you
have to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly
across the sun, alone and without a nest?” He quoted
Khalil Gibran to my hesitant mother, “Your children
are not your children. They are the sons and daughters
of Life’s longing for itself. They come through you but
not from you. You may give them your love but not
your thoughts. For they have their own thoughts.”
A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM
-[an extract from Wings of Fire];

No Men are Foreign

Remember, no men are strange, no countries foreign
Beneath all uniforms, a single body breathes
Like ours: the land our brothers walk upon
Is earth like this, in which we all shall lie.
They, too, aware of sun and air and water,
Are fed by peaceful harvests, by war’s long winter starv’d.
Their hands are ours, and in their lines we read
A labour not different from our own.
Remember they have eyes like ours that wake
Or sleep, and strength that can be won
By love. In every land is common life
That all can recognise and understand.
Let us remember, whenever we are told
To hate our brothers, it is ourselves
That we shall dispossess, betray, condemn.
Remember, we who take arms against each other
It is the human earth that we defile.
Our hells of fire and dust outrage the innocence
Of air that is everywhere our own,
Remember, no men are foreign, and no countries strange.
-JAMES KIRKUP
Glossary: GLOSSARY
dispossess: dislodge; deprive
defile: make dirty; pollute
outrage the innocence of: violate the purity of;



Reach the Top

Santosh Yadav
The only woman in the world who
has scaled Mt Everest twice was
born in a society where the birth of
a son was regarded as a blessing,
and a daughter, though not
considered a curse, was not
generally welcome. When her mother
was expecting Santosh, a travelling
‘holy man’, giving her his blessing,
assumed that she wanted a son.
But, to everyone’s surprise, the
unborn child’s grandmother, who
was standing close by, told him that
they did not want a son. The ‘holy
man’ was also surprised!
Nevertheless, he gave the requested
blessing . .. and as destiny would
have it, the blessing seemed to work.
Santosh was born the sixth child in
a family with five sons, a sister to
five brothers. She was born in the small village of
Joniyawas of Rewari District in Haryana.
2. The girl was given the name ‘Santosh’, which means
contentment. But Santosh was not always content
with her place in a traditional way of life. She began
living life on her own terms from the start. Where
other girls wore traditional Indian dresses, Santosh
preferred shorts. Looking back, she says now, “From
the very beginning I was quite determined that if I
chose a correct and a rational path, the others
around me had to change, not me.”
3. Santosh’s parents were affluent landowners who
could afford to send their children to the best
schools, even to the country’s capital, New Delhi,
which was quite close by. But, in line with the
prevailing custom in the family, Santosh had to
make do with the local village school. So, she decided
to fight the system in her own quiet way when
the right moment arrived. And the right moment
came when she turned sixteen. At sixteen, most of
the girls in her village used to get married.
Santosh was also under pressure from her parents
to do the same.
4. A marriage as early as that was the last thing on
her mind. She threatened her parents that she
would never marry if she did not get a proper
education. She left home and got herself enrolled
in a school in Delhi. When her parents refused to
pay for her education, she politely informed them
of her plans to earn money by working part time to
pay her school fees. Her parents then agreed to pay
for her education.
5. Wishing always to study “a bit more” and with her
father slowly getting used to her urge for more
education, Santosh passed the high school
examinations and went to Jaipur. She joined
Maharani College and got a room in Kasturba Hostel.
Santosh remembers, “Kasturba Hostel faced the
Aravalli Hills. I used to watch villagers from my room,
going up the hill and suddenly vanishing after a
while. One day I decided to check it out myself. I
found nobody except a few mountaineers. I asked if
I could join them. To my pleasant surprise, they
answered in the affirmative and motivated me to
take to climbing.”
6. Then there was no looking back for this determined
young girl. She saved money and enrolled in a
course at Uttarkashi’s Nehru Institute of
Mountaineering. “My college semester in Jaipur was
to end in April but it ended on the nineteenth of
May. And I was supposed to be in Uttarkashi on
the twenty-first. So, I did not go back home; instead,
I headed straight for the training. I had to write a
letter of apology to my father without whose
permission I had got myself enrolled at Uttarkashi.”
7. Thereafter, Santosh went on an
expedition every year. Her climbing
skills matured rapidly. Also, she
developed a remarkable resistance to
cold and the altitude. Equipped with
an iron will, physical endurance and
an amazing mental toughness, she
proved herself repeatedly. The
culmination of her hard work and
sincerity came in 1992, just four years
after she had shyly asked the Aravalli
mountaineers if she could join them.
At barely twenty years of age, Santosh
Yadav scaled Mt Everest, becoming the
youngest woman in the world to
achieve the feat. If her climbing skills,
physical fitness, and mental strength
impressed her seniors, her concern for
others and desire to work together with
them found her a special place in the
hearts of fellow climbers.
During the 1992 Everest mission, Santosh Yadav
provided special care to a climber who lay dying at
the South Col. She was unfortunately unsuccessful
in saving him. However, she managed to save
another climber, Mohan Singh, who would have
met with the same fate had she not shared her
oxygen with him.
9. Within twelve months, Santosh found herself a
member of an Indo-Nepalese Women’s Expedition
that invited her to join them. She then scaled the
Everest a second time, thus setting a record as the
only woman to have scaled the Everest twice, and
securing for herself and India a unique place in the
annals of mountaineering. In recognition
of her achievements, the Indian government
bestowed upon her one of the nation’s top honours,
the Padmashri.
10. Describing her feelings when she was literally ‘on
top of the world’, Santosh has said, “It took some
time for the enormity of the moment to sink
in... Then I unfurled the Indian tricolour and held it
aloft on the roof of the world. The feeling is
indescribable. The Indian flag was flying on top of
the world. It was truly a spiritual moment. I felt
proud as an Indian.”
Also a fervent environmentalist, Santosh collected
and brought down 500 kilograms of garbage from
the Himalayas.

Maria Sharapova
THERE is something disarming about Maria
Sharapova, something at odds with her ready smile
and glamorous attire. And that something in her
lifted her on Monday, 22 August 2005 to the world
number one position in women’s tennis. All this
happened in almost no time. Poised beyond her
years, the Siberian born teenager took just four
years as a professional to reach the pinnacle
However, the rapid ascent in a fiercely competitive
world began nine years before with a level of
sacrifice few children would be prepared to endure.
Little Maria had not yet celebrated her tenth
birthday when she was packed off to train in the
United States. That trip to Florida with her father
Yuri launched her on the path to success and
stardom. But it also required a heart-wrenching
two-year separation from her mother Yelena. The
latter was compelled to stay back in Siberia because
of visa restrictions. The nine-year-old girl had
already learnt an important lesson in life — that
tennis excellence would only come at a price.
3. “I used to be so lonely,” Maria Sharapova recalls. “I
missed my mother terribly. My father was working
as much as he could to keep my tennis-training
going. So, he couldn’t see me either.
4. “Because I was so young, I used to go to bed at
8 p.m. The other tennis pupils would come in at
11 p.m. and wake me up and order me to tidy up
the room and clean it.
5. “Instead of letting that depress me, I became more
quietly determined and mentally tough.
I learnt how to take care of myself. I never thought
of quitting because I knew what I wanted. When
you come from nothing and you have nothing, then
it makes you very hungry and determined . .. I would
have put up with much more humiliation and insults
than that to steadfastly pursue my dream.”
6. That toughness runs through Maria even today. It
was the key to her bagging the women’s singles crown
at Wimbledon in 2004 and to her meteoric rise to
the world number one spot the following year.
7. While her journey from the frozen plains of Siberia
to the summit of women’s tennis has touched the
hearts of tennis fans, for the youngster herself there
appears to be no room for sentiment. The straight
looks and the answers she gives when asked about
her ambition make it amply clear that she considers
the sacrifices were worth it. “I am very, very
competitive. I work hard at what I do. It’s my job.”
This is her mantra for success.
8. Though Maria Sharapova speaks with a pronounced
American accent, she proudly parades her Russian
nationality. Clearing all doubts, she says, “I’m
Russian. It’s true that the U.S. is a big part of my
life. But I have Russian citizenship. My blood is
totally Russian. I will play the Olympics for Russia
if they want me.”
9. Like any number of teenaged sensations, Maria
Sharapova lists fashion, singing and dancing as her
hobbies. She loves reading the novels of Arthur Conan
Doyle. Her fondness for sophisticated evening gowns
appears at odds with her love of pancakes with
chocolate spread and fizzy orange drinks.
10. Maria Sharapova cannot be pigeon-holed or
categorised. Her talent, unwavering desire to
succeed and readiness to sacrifice have lifted her
to the top of the world. Few would grudge her the
riches she is now reaping. This is what she has to
say about her monetary gains from tennis:
“Of course, money is a motivation. Tennis is a
business and a sport, but the most important thing
is to become number one in the world. That’s the
dream that kept me going.”;

On Killing A Tree

It takes much time to kill a tree,
Not a simple jab of the knife
Will do it. It has grown
Slowly consuming the earth,
Rising out of it, feeding
Upon its crust, absorbing
Years of sunlight, air, water,
And out of its leprous hide
Sprouting leaves.
So hack and chop
But this alone wont do it.
Not so much pain will do it.
The bleeding bark will heal
And from close to the ground
Will rise curled green twigs,
Miniature boughs
Which if unchecked will expand again
To former size.
No,
The root is to be pulled out —
Out of the anchoring earth;
It is to be roped, tied,
And pulled out — snapped out
Or pulled out entirely,
Out from the earth-cave,
And the strength of the tree exposed
The source, white and wet,
The most sensitive, hidden
For years inside the earth.
Then the matter
Of scorching and choking
In sun and air,
Browning, hardening,
Twisting, withering,
And then it is done.
-GIEVE PATEL
GLOSSARY:
jab: sudden rough blow
leprous hide: discoloured bark
hack: cut roughly by striking heavy blows
anchoring earth: Trees are held securely with the help of the roots in the earth.
snapped out: chopped out
scorching and choking: the drying up of the tree after being uprooted;


Trees
I think that I shall never see
A poem lovely as a tree.
A tree whose hungry mouth is prest
Against the earth’s sweet flowing breast;
A tree that looks at God all day
And lifts her leafy arms to pray;
A tree that may in summer wear
A nest of robins in her hair;
Upon whose bosom snow has lain;
Who intimately lives with rain.
Poems are made by fools like me,
But only God can make a tree.
-JOYCE KILMER;


Kathmandu
I GET a cheap room in the centre of town and sleep
for hours. The next morning, with Mr Shah’s son
and nephew, I visit the two temples in Kathmandu
that are most sacred to Hindus and Buddhists.
2. At Pashupatinath (outside which a sign
proclaims ‘Entrance for the Hindus only’) there is
an atmosphere of ‘febrile confusion’. Priests,
hawkers, devotees, tourists, cows, monkeys, pigeons
and dogs roam through the grounds. We offer a few
flowers. There are so many worshippers that some
people trying to get the priest’s attention are elbowed
aside by others pushing their way to the front. A
princess of the Nepalese royal house appears;
everyone bows and makes way. By the main gate, a
party of saffron-clad Westerners struggle for
permission to enter. The policeman is not convinced
that they are ‘the Hindus’ (only Hindus are allowed
to enter the temple). A fight breaks out between
two monkeys. One chases the other, who jumps
onto a shivalinga, then runs screaming around the
temples and down to the river, the holy Bagmati,that flows below. A corpse is being cremated on its
banks; washerwomen are at their work and children
bathe. From a balcony a basket of flowers and
leaves, old offerings now wilted, is dropped into the
river. A small shrine half protrudes from the stone
platform on the river bank. When it emerges fully,
the goddess inside will escape, and the evil period
of the Kaliyug will end on earth. 
At the Baudhnath stupa, the Buddhist shrine of
Kathmandu, there is, in contrast, a sense of
stillness. Its immense white dome is ringed by a
road. Small shops stand on its outer edge: many of
these are owned by Tibetan immigrants; felt bags,
Tibetan prints and silver jewellery can be bought
here. There are no crowds: this is a haven of
quietness in the busy streets around.
4. Kathmandu is vivid, mercenary, religious, with
small shrines to flower-adorned deities along the
narrowest and busiest streets; with fruit sellers,
flute sellers, hawkers of postcards; shops selling
Western cosmetics, film rolls and chocolate; or
copper utensils and Nepalese antiques. Film songs
blare out from the radios, car horns sound, bicycle
bells ring, stray cows low questioningly at
motorcycles, vendors shout out their wares. I indulge
myself mindlessly: buy a bar of marzipan, a cornon-
the-cob roasted in a charcoal brazier on the
pavement (rubbed with salt, chilli powder and
lemon); a couple of love story comics, and even a
Reader’s Digest. All this I wash down with Coca Cola
and a nauseating orange drink, and feel much the
better for it.
5. I consider what route I should take back home. If I
were propelled by enthusiasm for travel per se,
I would go by bus and train to Patna, then sail up
the Ganges past Benaras to Allahabad, then up the
Yamuna, past Agra to Delhi. But I am too exhausted
and homesick; today is the last day of August. Go
home, I tell myself: move directly towards home. I
enter a Nepal Airlines office and buy a ticket for
tomorrow’s flight.
6. I look at the flute seller standing in a corner of the
square near the hotel. In his hand is a pole with
an attachment at the top from which fifty or sixty
bansuris protrude in all directions, like the quills
of a porcupine. They are of bamboo: there are crossflutes
and recorders. From time to time he stands
the pole on the ground, selects a flute and plays
for a few minutes. The sound rises clearly above
the noise of the traffic and the hawkers’ cries. He
plays slowly, meditatively, without excessive
display. He does not shout out his wares.
Occasionally he makes a sale, but in a curiously
offhanded way as if this were incidental to his
enterprise. Sometimes he breaks off playing to talk
to the fruit seller. I imagine that this has been the
pattern of his life for years.
7. I find it difficult to tear myself away from the square.
Flute music always does this to me: it is at once
the most universal and most particular of sounds.
There is no culture that does not have its flute—
the reed neh, the recorder, the Japanese shakuhachi,
the deep bansuri of Hindustani classical music,
the clear or breathy flutes of South America,
the high-pitched Chinese flutes. Each has its
specific fingering and compass. It weaves its own
associations. Yet to hear any flute is, it seems to
me, to be drawn into the commonality of all
mankind, to be moved by music closest in its
phrases and sentences to the human voice. Its
motive force too is living breath: it too needs to
pause and breathe before it can go on.
8. That I can be so affected by a few familiar phrases
on the bansuri, surprises me at first, for on the
previous occasions that I have returned home after
a long absence abroad, I have hardly noticed such
details, and certainly have not invested them with
the significance I now do.
VIKRAM SETH
[an extract from Heaven Lake];

A Slumber did my Spirit Seal

A slumber did my spirit seal—
I had no human fears.
She seemed a thing that could not feel
The touch of earthly years.
No motion has she now, no force—
She neither hears nor sees,
Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course
With rocks and stones and trees.
-WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

GLOSSARY
diurnal: daily (“Earth’s diurnal course” is earth’s daily rotation on its axis.);



Fear No More


Fear no more the heat o’ the sun,
Nor the furious winter’s rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o’ the great,
Thou art past the tyrant’s stroke;
Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning-flash,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finished joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust.
-WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE;


If I Were You

SCENE: A small cottage interior. There is an entrance back right (which
may be curtained). Another door to the left must be a practical door. The
furniture is simple, consisting of a small table towards the left, a chair or
two, and a divan rather upstage on the right. On the table is a telephone.

(When the curtain rises Gerrard is standing by the table making a phone
call. He is of medium height, and wearing horn-rimmed glasses . . . He
is dressed in a lounge suit and a great coat. His voice is cultured.)
GERRARD : . .. Well, tell him to phone up directly. I must know. ..
Yes, I expect I’ll still be here, but you mustn’t count on
that ... In about ten minutes’ time. Right-ho. Goodbye.

(He puts down the phone and goes to the divan on the left, where there
is a travelling bag, and starts packing. Whilst he is thus engaged, another
man, similar in build to Gerrard enters from the right silently — revolver
in hand. He is flashily dressed in an overcoat and a soft hat. He bumps
accidentally against the table, and at the sound Gerrard turns quickly.)

GERRARD : (pleasantly) Why, this is a surprise, Mr— er—
INTRUDER : I’m glad you’re pleased to see me. I don’t think you’ll be
pleased for long. Put those paws up!
GERRARD : This is all very melodramatic, not very original, perhaps,
but…
INTRUDER : Trying to be calm and —er—
GERRARD : ‘Nonchalant’ is your word, I think.
INTRUDER : Thanks a lot. You’ll soon stop being smart. I’ll make you
crawl. I want to know a few things, see.
GERRARD : Anything you like. I know all the answers. But before we
begin I should like to change my position; you may be
comfortable, but I am not.
INTRUDER : Sit down there, and no funny business. (Motions to a
chair, and seats himself on the divan by the bag.) Now
then, we’ll have a nice little talk about yourself!
GERRARD : At last a sympathetic audience! I’ll tell you the story of
my life. How as a child I was stolen by the gypsies, and
why at the age of thirty-two, I find myself in my lonely
Essex cottage, how ...
INTRUDER : Keep it to yourself, and just answer my questions. You
live here alone? Well, do you?
GERRARD : I’m sorry. I thought you were telling me, not asking me.
A question of inflection; your voice is unfamiliar.
INTRUDER : (with emphasis) Do you live here alone?
GERRARD : And if I don’t answer?
INTRUDER : You’ve got enough sense not to want to get hurt.
GERRARD : I think good sense is shown more in the ability to avoid
pain than in the mere desire to do so. What do you think,
Mr— er—
INTRUDER : Never mind my name. I like yours better, Mr Gerrard.
What are your Christian names?
GERRARD : Vincent Charles.
INTRUDER : Do you run a car?
GERRARD :No.
INTRUDER : That’s a lie. You’re not dealing with a fool. I’m as smart
as you and smarter, and I know you run a car. Better be
careful, wise guy!
GERRARD : Are you American, or is that merely a clever imitation?
INTRUDER : Listen, this gun’s no toy. I can hurt you without killing
you, and still get my answers.
GERRARD : Of course, if you put it like that, I’ll be glad to assist you.
I do possess a car, and it’s in the garage round the corner.
INTRUDER : That’s better. Do people often come out here?
GERRARD : Very rarely. Surprisingly few people take the trouble to
visit me. There’s the baker and the greengrocer, of course;
and then there’s the milkman — quite charming, but no
one so interesting as yourself.
INTRUDER : I happen to know that you never see tradespeople.
GERRARD : You seem to have taken a considerable amount of trouble.
Since you know so much about me, won’t you say
something about yourself? You have been so modest.
INTRUDER : I could tell you plenty. You think you’re smart, but I’m
the top of the class round here. I’ve got brains and I use
them. That’s how I’ve got where I have.
GERRARD : And where precisely have you got? It didn’t require a
great brain to break into my little cottage.
INTRUDER : When you know why I’ve broken into your little cottage,
you’ll be surprised, and it won’t be a pleasant surprise.
GERRARD : With you figuring so largely in it, that is understandable.
By the way, what particular line of crime do you embrace,
or aren’t you a specialist?
INTRUDER : My speciality’s jewel robbery. Your car will do me a treat.
It’s certainly a dandy bus.
GERRARD : I’m afraid jewels are few and far between in the wilds of
Essex.
INTRUDER : So are the cops. I can retire here nicely for a little while.
GERRARD : You mean to live with me? A trifle sudden isn’t it; you’ve
not been invited.
INTRUDER : You won’t be here long; so I didn’t trouble to ask.
GERRARD : What do you mean?
INTRUDER : This is your big surprise. I’m going to kill you.
GERRARD : A little harsh, isn’t it?
INTRUDER : (with heavy sarcasm) Yeah, I’ll be sorry to do it. I’ve taken
a fancy to you, but it’s just got to be done.
GERRARD : Why add murder to your other crimes? It’s a grave step
you’re taking.
INTRUDER : I’m not taking it for fun. I’ve been hunted long enough.
I’m wanted for murder already, and they can’t hang me
twice.
GERRARD : You’re planning a gratuitous double, so to speak. Admitted
you’ve nothing to lose, but what have you to gain?
INTRUDER : I’ve got freedom to gain. As for myself, I’m a poor hunted
rat. As Vincent Charles Gerrard I’m free to go places and
do nothing. I can eat well and sleep and without having
to be ready to beat it at the sight of a cop.
GERRARD : In most melodramas the villain is foolish enough to delay
his killing long enough to be frustrated. You are much
luckier.
INTRUDER : I’m O.K. I’ve got a reason for everything. I’m going to be
Vincent Charles Gerrard, see. I’ve got to know what he
talks like. Now I know. That posh stuff comes easy. This
is Mr V.C. Gerrard speaking. (Pantomime of phoning, in
imitation cultured voice.) And that’s not all. (He stands
up.) Get up a minute (Gerrard stands.) Now take a look at
me.
GERRARD : You’re not particularly decorative.
INTRUDER : No! Well, that goes for you, too. I’ve only got to wear
specs and I’ll be enough like you to get away with it.
GERRARD : What about your clothes? They’ll let you down if you’re
not careful.
INTRUDER : That’ll be all right. Yours will fit me fine.
GERRARD : That is extremely interesting, but you seem to miss the
point of my remark. I said, you were luckier than most
melodramatic villains. It was not a tribute to your
intelligence. You won’t kill me for a very good reason.
INTRUDER : So that’s what you think.
GERRARD : You’ll let me go, and thank God you didn’t shoot sooner.
INTRUDER : Come on. What’s on your mind! Better be quick. This
conversation bores me.
GERRARD : Your idea is to elude the police by killing me and taking
on my identity?
INTRUDER : Yes, I like the idea.
GERRARD : But are you sure it’s going to help you?
INTRUDER : Now listen here. I’ve got this all planned. I did a job in
town. Things went wrong and I killed a cop. Since then
I’ve done nothing but dodge.
GERRARD : And this is where dodging has brought you?
INTRUDER : It brought me to Aylesbury. That’s where I saw you in the
car. Two other people saw you and started to talk. I
listened. It looks like you’re a bit queer — kind of a mystery
man.
GERRARD : A mystery which I propose to explain.
INTRUDER : (disregarding him) You phone your orders and sometimes
you go away suddenly and come back just the same.
Those are just the things I want to do. Hearing about you
was one of my luckiest breaks.
GERRARD : Apparently you haven’t the intelligence to ask why I am
invested in this cloak of mystery.
INTRUDER : (preparing to shoot) As I said before, this conversation
bores me.
GERRARD : Don’t be a fool. If you shoot, you’ll hang for sure. If not as
yourself, then as Vincent Charles Gerrard.
INTRUDER : What is this?
GERRARD : This is your big surprise. I said you wouldn’t kill me and
I was right. Why do you think I am here today and gone
tomorrow, never see tradespeople? You say my habits
would suit you. You are a crook. Do you think I am a
Sunday-school teacher?
The game’s up as far as I’m concerned. Things went
wrong with me. I said it with bullets and got away.
Unfortunately they got one of my men, and found things
the fool should have burnt. Tonight I’m expecting trouble.
My bag’s packed ready to clear off. There it is.
INTRUDER : It’s a bag all right and
this is a gun all right.
What’s all this?
GERRARD : That’s a disguise outfit;
false moustaches and
what not. Now do you
believe me?
INTRUDER : (musingly) I don’t know.
GERRARD : For God’s sake clear
that muddled head of
yours and let’s go.
Come with me in the
car. I can use you. If you
find it’s a frame, you’ve
got me in the car, and
you’ve still got your gun.
INTRUDER : May be you’re right.
GERRARD : Then don’t waste time.
(Goes and picks up hat
and bag.)
INTRUDER : Careful, boss, I’m
watching you.
GERRARD : I have got a man posted
on the main road. He’ll
ring up if he sees the police, but I don’t want to leave ... (telephone bell rings)
Come on! They’re after us. Through here straight to
the garage.
INTRUDER : How do I know that you are telling the truth?
GERRARD : Oh, don’t be a fool. Look for yourself.
(Gerrard opens door and steps away. Intruder leans forward
to inspect it, with his side towards Gerrard, but with the
revolver ready. As he turns his head, Gerrard gives him a
push into the cupboard, knocking the revolver out of his
hand. He slams the door and locks it, picks up the revolver
and goes to the phone, where he stands with the gun pointed
at the cupboard door.)
INTRUDER : (rattles door and shouts) Let me out of here!
GERRARD : Hello. Yes, speaking. Sorry I can’t let you have the props
in time for rehearsal, I’ve had a spot of bother — quite
amusing. I think I’ll put it in my next play. Listen, can
you tell our friend the Sergeant to come up here at once?
You’ll probably find him in the Public Bar.
-DOUGLAS JAMES;
}
Excercises:
{
}
}
______________________________________________________________________IX-II
Level 3: { Content: { 
A Letter to God


THE house — the only one in the entire valley — sat
on the crest of a low hill. From this height one
could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted
with the flowers that always promised a good
harvest. The only thing the earth needed was a
downpour or at least a shower. Throughout the
morning Lencho — who knew his fields intimately
— had done nothing else but see the sky towards
the north-east.
“Now we’re really going to get some water, woman.”
The woman who was preparing supper, replied,
“Yes, God willing”. The older boys were working in
the field, while the smaller ones were playing near
the house until the woman called to them all, “Come
for dinner”. It was during the meal that, just as
Lencho had predicted, big drops of rain began to
fall. In the north-east huge mountains of clouds
could be seen approaching. The air was fresh and
sweet. The man went out for no other reason than
to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body,
and when he returned he exclaimed, ‘‘These aren’t
raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins.
The big drops are ten cent pieces and the little ones
are fives.’’
With a satisfied expression he regarded the field
of ripe corn with its flowers, draped in a curtain of
rain. But suddenly a strong wind began to blow
and along with the rain very large hailstones began
to fall. These truly did resemble new silver coins.
The boys, exposing themselves to the rain, ran out
to collect the frozen pearls.
‘‘It’s really getting bad now,’’ exclaimed the man.
“I hope it passes quickly.” It did not pass quickly.
For an hour the hail rained on the house, the
garden, the hillside, the cornfield, on the whole
valley. The field was white, as if covered with salt.
Not a leaf remained on the trees. The corn was
totally destroyed. The flowers were gone from the
plants. Lencho’s soul was filled with sadness. When
the storm had passed, he stood in the middle of the
field and said to his sons, “A plague of locusts would
have left more than this. The hail has left nothing.
This year we will have no corn.’’
That night was a sorrowful one.
“All our work, for nothing.”
‘‘There’s no one who can help us.”
“We’ll all go hungry this year.”	
But in the hearts of all who lived in that solitary
house in the middle of the valley, there was a single
hope: help from God.
“Don’t be so upset, even though this seems like
a total loss. Remember, no one dies of hunger.”
“That’s what they say: no one dies of hunger.”
All through the night, Lencho thought only of
his one hope: the help of God, whose eyes, as he
had been instructed, see everything, even what is
deep in one’s conscience. Lencho was an ox of a
man, working like an animal in the fields, but still
he knew how to write. The following Sunday, at
daybreak, he began to write a letter which he
himself would carry to town and place in the mail.
It was nothing less than a letter to God.
“God,” he wrote, “if you don’t help me, my family
and I will go hungry this year. I need a hundred
pesos in order to sow my field again and to live
until the crop comes, because the hailstorm... .”
He wrote ‘To God’ on the envelope, put the letter
inside and, still troubled, went to town. At the post
office, he placed a stamp on the letter and dropped
it into the mailbox.
One of the employees, who was a postman and
also helped at the post office, went to his boss
laughing heartily and showed him the letter to God.
Never in his career as a postman had he known
that address. The postmaster — a fat, amiable
fellow — also broke out laughing, but almost
immediately he turned serious and, tapping the
letter on his desk, commented, “What faith! I wish I
had the faith of the man who wrote this letter.
Starting up a correspondence with God!”
So, in order not to shake the writer’s faith in God,
the postmaster came up with an idea: answer the
letter. But when he opened it, it was evident that to
answer it he needed something more than goodwill,
ink and paper. But he stuck to his resolution: he
asked for money from his employees, he himself gave
part of his salary, and several friends of his were
obliged to give something ‘for an act of charity’.
It was impossible for him to gather together the
hundred pesos, so he was able to send the farmer
only a little more than half. He put the money in an
envelope addressed to Lencho and with it a letter
containing only a single word as a signature: God.
The following Sunday Lencho came a bit earlier
than usual to ask if there was a letter for him.
It was the postman himself who handed the letter
to him while the postmaster, experiencing the
contentment of a man who has performed a good
deed, looked on from his office.
Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on
seeing the money; such was his confidence — but
he became angry when he counted the money. God
could not have made a mistake, nor could he have
denied Lencho what he had requested.
Immediately, Lencho went up to the window to
ask for paper and ink. On the public writing-table,
he started to write, with much wrinkling of his brow,
caused by the effort he had to make to express his
ideas. When he finished, he went to the window to
buy a stamp which he licked and then affixed to
the envelope with a blow of his fist. The moment
the letter fell into the mailbox the postmaster went
to open it. It said: “God: Of the money that I asked
for, only seventy pesos reached me. Send me the
rest, since I need it very much. But don’t send it to
me through the mail because the post office
employees are a bunch of crooks. Lencho.”;

Fire and Ice
Some say the world will end in fire
Some say in ice.
From what I’ve tasted of desire
I hold with those who favour fire.
But if it had to perish twice,
I think I know enough of hate
To say that for destruction ice
Is also great
And would suffice.
-ROBERT FROST;

Nelson Mandela

TENTH May dawned bright and clear. For the past
few days I had been pleasantly besieged by
dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to
pay their respects before the inauguration. The
inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of
international leaders on South African soil.
The ceremonies took place in the lovely
sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union
Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been
the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the
site of a rainbow gathering of different colours and
nations for the installation of South Africa’s first
democratic, non-racial government.
On that lovely autumn day I was accompanied
by my daughter Zenani. On the podium, Mr de Klerk
was first sworn in as second deputy president. Then
Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as first deputy president.
When it was my turn, I pledged to obey and uphold
the Constitution and to devote myself to the wellbeing
of the Republic and its people. To the
assembled guests and the watching world, I said:
Today, all of us do, by our presence here... confer glory
and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of
an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long,
must be born a society of which all humanity will
be proud.
We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today
been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of
the world on our own soil. We thank all of our
distinguished international guests for having come to
take possession with the people of our country of what
is, after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for
human dignity.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation.
We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the
continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering,
gender and other discrimination.
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this
beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one
by another.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human
achievement.
Let freedom reign. God bless Africa!
A few moments later we all lifted our eyes in
awe as a spectacular array of South African jets,
helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect
formation over the Union Buildings. It was not only
a display of pinpoint precision and military force,
but a demonstration of the military’s loyalty to
democracy, to a new government that had been
freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the
highest generals of the South African defence force
and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and
medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged
their loyalty. I was not unmindful of the fact that
not so many years before they would not have
saluted but arrested me. Finally a chevron of Impala
jets left a smoke trail of the black, red, green, blue
and gold of the new South African flag.
The day was symbolised for me by the playing of
our two national anthems, and the vision of whites
singing ‘Nkosi Sikelel –iAfrika’ and blacks singing
‘Die Stem’, the old anthem of the Republic. Although
that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem
they once despised, they would soon know the
words by heart.
On the day of the inauguration, I was
overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first
decade of the twentieth century, a few years after
the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth,
the white-skinned peoples of South Africa patched
up their differences and erected a system of racial
domination against the dark-skinned peoples of their
own land. The structure they created formed the
basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane,
societies the world has ever known. Now, in the
last decade of the twentieth century, and my own
eighth decade as a man, that system had been
overturned forever and replaced by one that
recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples,
regardless of the colour of their skin.
That day had come about through the
unimaginable sacrifices of thousands of my people,
people whose suffering and courage can never be
counted or repaid. I felt that day, as I have on so
many other days, that I was simply the sum of all
those African patriots who had gone before me. That
long and noble line ended and now began again
with me. I was pained that I was not able to thank
them and that they were not able to see what their
sacrifices had wrought.
The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting
wound in my country and my people. All of us will
spend many years, if not generations, recovering
from that profound hurt. But the decades of
oppression and brutality had another, unintended,
effect, and that was that it produced the Oliver
Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the
Yusuf Dadoos, the Bram Fischers, the Robert
Sobukwes of our time* — men of such extraordinary 
courage, wisdom and generosity that their like may
never be known again. Perhaps it requires such
depths of oppression to create such heights of
character. My country is rich in the minerals and
gems that lie beneath its soil, but I have always
known that its greatest wealth is its people, finer
and truer than the purest diamonds.
It is from these comrades in the struggle that I
learned the meaning of courage. Time and again, I
have seen men and women risk and give their lives
for an idea. I have seen men stand up to attacks
and torture without breaking, showing a strength
and resilience that defies the imagination. I learned
that courage was not the absence of fear, but the
triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does
not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear.
No one is born hating another person because of
the colour of his skin, or his background, or his
religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can
learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love
comes more naturally to the human heart than its
opposite. Even in the grimmest times in prison, when
my comrades and I were pushed to our limits, I would
see a glimmer of humanity in one of the guards,
perhaps just for a second, but it was enough to
reassure me and keep me going. Man’s goodness is
a flame that can be hidden but never extinguished.

In life, every man has twin obligations —
obligations to his family, to his parents, to his wife
and children; and he has an obligation to his people,
his community, his country. In a civil and humane
society, each man is able to fulfil those obligations
according to his own inclinations and abilities. But
in a country like South Africa, it was almost
impossible for a man of my birth and colour to fulfil
both of those obligations. In South Africa, a man of
colour who attempted to live as a human being was
punished and isolated. In South Africa, a man who
tried to fulfil his duty to his people was inevitably
ripped from his family and his home and was forced
to live a life apart, a twilight existence of secrecy
and rebellion. I did not in the beginning choose to
place my people above my family, but in attempting
to serve my people, I found that I was prevented
from fulfilling my obligations as a son, a brother, a
father and a husband.
I was not born with a hunger to be free. I was born
free — free in every way that I could know. Free to
run in the fields near my mother’s hut, free to swim
in the clear stream that ran through my village, free
to roast mealies under the stars and ride the broad
backs of slow-moving bulls. As long as I obeyed my
father and abided by the customs of my tribe, I was
not troubled by the laws of man or God.
It was only when I began to learn that my boyhood
freedom was an illusion, when I discovered as a
young man that my freedom had already been taken
from me, that I began to hunger for it. At first, as a
student, I wanted freedom only for myself, the
transitory freedoms of being able to stay out at night,
read what I pleased and go where I chose. Later, as
a young man in Johannesburg, I yearned for the
basic and honourable freedoms of achieving my
potential, of earning my keep, of marrying and
having a family — the freedom not to be obstructed
in a lawful life.
But then I slowly saw that not only was I not
free, but my brothers and sisters were not free. I
saw that it was not just my freedom that was
curtailed, but the freedom of everyone who looked
like I did. That is when I joined the African National
Congress, and that is when the hunger for my own
freedom became the greater hunger for the freedom
of my people. It was this desire for the freedom of
my people to live their lives with dignity and selfrespect
that animated my life, that transformed a
frightened young man into a bold one, that drove a
law-abiding attorney to become a criminal, that
turned a family-loving husband into a man without
a home, that forced a life-loving man to live like a
monk. I am no more virtuous or self-sacrificing
than the next man, but I found that I could not
even enjoy the poor and limited freedoms I was
allowed when I knew my people were not free.
Freedom is indivisible; the chains on anyone of
my people were the chains on all of them, the
chains on all of my people were the chains on me.
I knew that the oppressor must be liberated just
as surely as the oppressed. A man who takes away
another man’s freedom is a prisoner of hatred; he is
locked behind the bars of prejudice and narrowmindedness.
I am not truly free if I am taking away
someone else’s freedom, just as surely as I am not
free when my freedom is taken from me. The oppressed
and the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity.;


A Tiger in the Zoo

He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage.
He should be lurking in shadow,
Sliding through long grass
Near the water hole
Where plump deer pass.
He should be snarling around houses
At the jungle’s edge,
Baring his white fangs, his claws,
Terrorising the village!
But he’s locked in a concrete cell,
His strength behind bars,
Stalking the length of his cage,
Ignoring visitors.
He hears the last voice at night,
The patrolling cars,
And stares with his brilliant eyes
At the brilliant stars.
-LESLIE NORRIS

Glossary: 
Snarls: makes an angry, warning sound;

Two stories about flying

His First Flight

THE young seagull was alone on his ledge. His two
brothers and his sister had already flown away the
day before. He had been afraid to fly with them.
Somehow when he had taken a little run forward to
the brink of the ledge and attempted to flap his
wings he became afraid. The great expanse of sea
stretched down beneath, and it was such a long
way down — miles down. He felt certain that his
wings would never support him; so he bent his head
and ran away back to the little hole under the ledge
where he slept at night. Even when each of his
brothers and his little sister, whose wings were far
shorter than his own, ran to the brink, flapped their
wings, and flew away, he failed to muster up courage
to take that plunge which appeared to him so
desperate. His father and mother had come around
calling to him shrilly, upbraiding him, threatening
to let him starve on his ledge unless he flew away.
But for the life of him he could not move.
That was twenty-four hours ago. Since then
nobody had come near him. The day before, all day
long, he had watched his parents flying about with
his brothers and sister, perfecting them in the art
of flight, teaching them how to skim the waves and
how to dive for fish. He had, in fact, seen his older
brother catch his first herring and devour it,
standing on a rock, while his parents circled around
raising a proud cackle. And all the morning the
whole family had walked about on the big plateau
midway down the opposite cliff taunting him with
his cowardice.
The sun was now ascending the sky, blazing on
his ledge that faced the south. He felt the heat
because he had not eaten since the previous nightfall.
He stepped slowly out to the brink of the ledge,
and standing on one leg with the other leg hidden
under his wing, he closed one eye, then the other,
and pretended to be falling asleep. Still they took
no notice of him. He saw his two brothers and his
sister lying on the plateau dozing with their heads
sunk into their necks. His father was preening the
feathers on his white back. Only his mother was
looking at him. She was standing on a little high
hump on the plateau, her white breast thrust
forward. Now and again, she tore at a piece of fish
that lay at her feet and then scrapped each side of
her beak on the rock. The sight of the food maddened
him. How he loved to tear food that way, scrapping
his beak now and again to whet it.
“Ga, ga, ga,” he cried begging her to bring him
some food. “Gaw-col-ah,” she screamed back
derisively. But he kept calling plaintively, and
after a minute or so he uttered a joyful scream.
His mother had picked up a piece of the fish and
was flying across to him with it. He leaned out
eagerly, tapping the rock with his feet, trying to
get nearer to her as she flew across. But when
she was just opposite to him, she halted, her
wings motionless, the piece of fish in her beak
almost within reach of his beak. He waited a
moment in surprise, wondering why she did not
come nearer, and then, maddened by hunger, he
dived at the fish. With a loud scream he fell
outwards and downwards into space. Then a
monstrous terror seized him and his heart stood
still. He could hear nothing. But it only lasted a
minute. The next moment he felt his wings spread
outwards. The wind rushed against his breast
feathers, then under his stomach, and against his
wings. He could feel the tips of his wings cutting
through the air. He was not falling headlong now.
He was soaring gradually downwards and outwards.
He was no longer afraid. He just felt a bit dizzy.
Then he flapped his wings once and he soared
upwards. “Ga, ga, ga, Ga, ga, ga, Gaw-col-ah,” his
mother swooped past him, her wings making a
loud noise. He answered her with another scream.
Then his father flew over him screaming. He saw
his two brothers and his sister flying around him
curveting and banking and soaring and diving.
Then he completely forgot that he had not always
been able to fly, and commended himself to dive
and soar and curve, shrieking shrilly.
He was near the sea now, flying straight over
it, facing straight out over the ocean. He saw a
vast green sea beneath him, with little ridges
moving over it and he turned his beak sideways
and cawed amusedly.
His parents and his brothers and sister had
landed on this green flooring ahead of him. They
were beckoning to him, calling shrilly. He dropped
his legs to stand on the green sea. His legs sank
into it. He screamed with fright and attempted to
rise again flapping his wings. But he was tired and
weak with hunger and he could not rise, exhausted
by the strange exercise. His feet sank into the green
sea, and then his belly touched it and he sank no
farther. He was floating on it, and around him his
family was screaming, praising him and their beaks
were offering him scraps of dog-fish.
He had made his first flight.

The Black Aeroplane

THE moon was coming up in the east, behind me,
and stars were shining in the clear sky above me.
There wasn’t a cloud in the sky. I was happy to be
alone high up above the sleeping countryside. I was
flying my old Dakota aeroplane over France back to
England. I was dreaming of my holiday and looking
forward to being with my family. I looked at my
watch: one thirty in the morning.
‘I should call Paris Control soon,’ I thought. As I
looked down past the nose of the aeroplane, I saw
the lights of a big city in front of me. I switched on
the radio and said, “Paris Control, Dakota DS 088
here. Can you hear me? I’m on my way to England.
Over.”
The voice from the radio answered me immediately:
“DS 088, I can hear you. You ought to turn twelve
degrees west now, DS 088. Over.”
I checked the map and the compass, switched
over to my second and last fuel tank, and turned
the Dakota twelve degrees west towards England.
‘I’ll be in time for breakfast,’ I thought. A good
big English breakfast! Everything was going well —
it was an easy flight.
Paris was about 150 kilometres behind me when
I saw the clouds. Storm clouds. They were huge.
They looked like black mountains standing in front
of me across the sky. I knew I could not fly up and
over them, and I did not have enough fuel to fly
around them to the north or south.
“I ought to go back to Paris,” I thought, but I
wanted to get home. I wanted that breakfast.
‘I’ll take the risk,’ I thought, and flew that old
Dakota straight into the storm.
Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black.
It was impossible to see anything outside the
aeroplane. The old aeroplane jumped and twisted
in the air. I looked at the compass. I couldn’t believe
my eyes: the compass was turning round and round
and round. It was dead. It would not work! The
other instruments were suddenly dead, too. I tried
the radio.
“Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me?”
There was no answer. The radio was dead too. I
had no radio, no compass, and I could not see where
I was. I was lost in the storm. Then, in the black
clouds quite near me, I saw another aeroplane. It
had no lights on its wings, but I could see it flying
next to me through the storm. I could see the pilot’s
face — turned towards me. I was very glad to see
another person. He lifted one hand and waved.
“Follow me,” he was saying. “Follow me.”
‘He knows that I am lost,’ I thought. ‘He’s trying
to help me.’
He turned his aeroplane slowly to the north, in
front of my Dakota, so that it would be easier for
me to follow him. I was very happy to go behind the
strange aeroplane like an obedient child.
After half an hour the strange black aeroplane
was still there in front of me in the clouds. Now
there was only enough fuel in the old Dakota’s last
tank to fly for five or ten minutes more. I was
starting to feel frightened again. But then he started
to go down and I followed through the storm.
Suddenly I came out of the clouds and saw two
long straight lines of lights in front of me. It was a
runway! An airport! I was safe! I turned to look for
my friend in the black aeroplane, but the sky was
empty. There was nothing there. The black
aeroplane was gone. I could not see it anywhere.
I landed and was not sorry to walk away from the
old Dakota near the control tower. I went and asked
a woman in the control centre where I was and who
the other pilot was. I wanted to say ‘Thank you’.
She looked at me very strangely, and then
laughed.
“Another aeroplane? Up there in this storm? No
other aeroplanes were flying tonight. Yours was the
only one I could see on the radar.”
So who helped me to arrive there safely without
a compass or a radio, and without any more fuel in
my tanks? Who was the pilot on the strange black
aeroplane, flying in the storm, without lights?;

How to Tell Wild Animals

If ever you should go by chance
To jungles in the east;
And if there should to you advance
A large and tawny beast,
If he roars at you as you’re dyin’
You’ll know it is the Asian Lion...
Or if some time when roaming round,
A noble wild beast greets you,
With black stripes on a yellow ground,
Just notice if he eats you.
This simple rule may help you learn
The Bengal Tiger to discern.
If strolling forth, a beast you view,
Whose hide with spots is peppered,
As soon as he has lept on you,
You’ll know it is the Leopard.
’Twill do no good to roar with pain,
He’ll only lep and lep again.
If when you’re walking round your yard
You meet a creature there,
Who hugs you very, very hard,
Be sure it is a Bear.
If you have any doubts, I guess
He’ll give you just one more caress.
Though to distinguish beasts of prey
A novice might nonplus,
The Crocodile you always may
Tell from the Hyena thus:
Hyenas come with merry smiles;
But if they weep they’re Crocodiles.
The true Chameleon is small,
A lizard sort of thing;
He hasn’t any ears at all,
And not a single wing.
If there is nothing on the tree,
’Tis the chameleon you see.
- Carolyn Wells
Glossary:
ground: background
discern: make out; identify
hide: animal skin
peppered: here, covered with spots
caress: a gentle, loving touch
novice: someone new to a job
(be) nonplus (sed) (usually only in the passive): (be) puzzle(d), confuse(d),
surprise(d);

The Ball Poem

What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
What, what is he to do? I saw it go
Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
Merrily over — there it is in the water!
No use to say ‘O there are other balls’:
An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
All his young days into the harbour where
His ball went. I would not intrude on him;
A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
He senses first responsibility
In a world of possessions. People will take
Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy.
And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
Knowing what every man must one day know
And most know many days, how to stand up.
-JOHN BERRYMAN

Glossary:
O there are other balls: The words suggest that the loss is not important enough
to worry about
shaking grief: sadness which greatly affects the boy
rigid: stiff
(to) intrude on: here, to enter a situation where one is not welcome
a dime: ten cents (U.S.)
desperate: hopeless
epistemology of loss: understanding the nature of loss — what it means to
lose something
epistemology: The Greek word episteme means ‘knowledge’ (it comes from a
word meaning ‘to understand, to know’). Epistemology is the study of the
nature of knowledge itself.;

From the Diary of Anne Frank

WRITING in a diary is a really strange experience for
someone like me. Not only because I’ve never written
anything before, but also because it seems to me
that later on neither I nor anyone else will be
interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old
schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn’t matter. I feel like
writing, and I have an even greater need to get all
kinds of things off my chest.
‘Paper has more patience than people.’ I thought
of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling
a little depressed and was sitting at home with my
chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering
whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I
was, brooding: Yes, paper does have more patience,
and since I’m not planning to let anyone else read
this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a
‘diary’, unless I should ever find a real friend, it
probably won’t make a bit of difference.
Now I’m back to the point that prompted me
to keep a diary in the first place: I don’t have a
friend.
Let me put it more clearly, since no one will
believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely
alone in the world. And I’m not. I have loving parents
and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about
thirty people I can call friends. I have a family,
loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I
seem to have everything, except my one true friend.
All I think about when I’m with friends is having a
good time. I can’t bring myself to talk about anything
but ordinary everyday things. We don’t seem to be
able to get any closer, and that’s the problem. Maybe
it’s my fault that we don’t confide in each other. In
any case, that’s just how things are, and
unfortunately they’re not liable to change. This is
why I’ve started the diary.
To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend
in my imagination, I don’t want to jot down the
facts in this diary the way most people would do,
but I want the diary to be my friend, and I’m going
to call this friend ‘Kitty’.

Since no one would understand a word of my
stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I’d better
provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike
doing so.
My father, the most adorable father I’ve ever seen,
didn’t marry my mother until he was thirty-six and
she was twenty-five. My sister, Margot, was born
in Frankfurt in Germany in 1926. I was born on 12
June 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. My
father emigrated to Holland in 1933. My mother,
Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland
in September, while Margot and I were sent to
Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went
to Holland in December, and I followed in February,
when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday
present for Margot.
I started right away at the Montessori nursery
school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time
I started in the first form. In the sixth form my
teacher was Mrs Kuperus, the headmistress. At the
end of the year we were both in tears as we said a
heartbreaking farewell.
In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had
to have an operation, so my birthday passed with
little celebration.
Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows
how often I think of her and still love her. This
birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make
up for the other, and Grandma’s candle was lit along
with the rest.
The four of us are still doing well, and that brings
me to the present date of 20 June 1942, and the
solemn dedication of my diary.

Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The
reason, of course, is the forthcoming meeting in
which the teachers decide who’ll move up to the
next form and who’ll be kept back. Half the class is
making bets. G.N. and I laugh ourselves silly at the
two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques, who have
staked their entire holiday savings on their bet.
From morning to night, it’s “You’re going to pass”,
“No, I’m not”, “Yes, you are”, “No, I’m not”. Even G.’s
pleading glances and my angry outbursts can’t calm
them down. If you ask me, there are so many
dummies that about a quarter of the class should
be kept back, but teachers are the most
unpredictable creatures on earth.
I’m not so worried about my girlfriends and
myself. We’ll make it. The only subject I’m not sure
about is maths. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until
then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There
are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr
Keesing, the old fogey who teaches maths, was
annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
After several warnings, he assigned me extra
homework. An essay on the subject, ‘A Chatterbox’.
A chatterbox — what can you write about that? I’d
worry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the
title in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried
to keep quiet.
That evening, after I’d finished the rest of my
homework, the note about the essay caught my eye.
I began thinking about the subject while chewing
the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on
and leave big spaces between the words, but the
trick was to come up with convincing arguments to
prove the necessity of talking. I thought and
thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the
three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was
satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait
and that I would do my best to keep it under control,
Dearest Kitty,
Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The
reason, of course, is the forthcoming meeting in
which the teachers decide who’ll move up to the
next form and who’ll be kept back. Half the class is
making bets. G.N. and I laugh ourselves silly at the
two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques, who have
staked their entire holiday savings on their bet.
From morning to night, it’s “You’re going to pass”,
“No, I’m not”, “Yes, you are”, “No, I’m not”. Even G.’s
pleading glances and my angry outbursts can’t calm
them down. If you ask me, there are so many
dummies that about a quarter of the class should
be kept back, but teachers are the most
unpredictable creatures on earth.
I’m not so worried about my girlfriends and
myself. We’ll make it. The only subject I’m not sure
about is maths. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until
then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There
are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr
Keesing, the old fogey who teaches maths, was
annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much.
After several warnings, he assigned me extra
homework. An essay on the subject, ‘A Chatterbox’.
A chatterbox — what can you write about that? I’d
worry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the
title in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried
to keep quiet.
That evening, after I’d finished the rest of my
homework, the note about the essay caught my eye.
I began thinking about the subject while chewing
the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on
and leave big spaces between the words, but the
trick was to come up with convincing arguments to
prove the necessity of talking. I thought and
thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the
three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was
satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait
and that I would do my best to keep it under control,
but that I would never be able to cure myself of the
habit since my mother talked as much as I did if
not more, and that there’s not much you can do
about inherited traits.
Mr Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments,
but when I proceeded to talk my way through the
next lesson, he assigned me a second essay. This
time it was supposed to be on ‘An Incorrigible
Chatterbox’. I handed it in, and Mr Keesing had
nothing to complain about for two whole lessons.
However, during the third lesson he’d finally had
enough. “Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in
class, write an essay entitled — ‘Quack, Quack,
Quack, Said Mistress Chatterbox’.”
The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I’d
nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of
chatterboxes. It was time to come up with
something else, something original. My friend,
Sanne, who’s good at poetry, offered to help me write
the essay from beginning to end in verse and I
jumped for joy. Mr Keesing was trying to play a
joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I’d make
sure the joke was on him.
I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was
about a mother duck and a father swan with three
baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the
father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Mr
Keesing took the joke the right way. He read the
poem to the class, adding his own comments, and
to several other classes as well. Since then I’ve been
allowed to talk and haven’t been assigned any extra
homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing’s always
making jokes these days.
Yours,
Anne
[Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl,
with slight adaptation];


Amanda!;
Don’t bite your nails, Amanda!
Don’t hunch your shoulders, Amanda!
Stop that slouching and sit up straight,
Amanda!
(There is a languid, emerald sea,
where the sole inhabitant is me—
a mermaid, drifting blissfully.)
Did you finish your homework, Amanda?
Did you tidy your room, Amanda?
I thought I told you to clean your shoes,
Amanda!
(I am an orphan, roaming the street.
I pattern soft dust with my hushed, bare feet.
The silence is golden, the freedom is sweet.)
Don’t eat that chocolate, Amanda!
Remember your acne, Amanda!
Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you,
Amanda!
(I am Rapunzel, I have not a care;
life in a tower is tranquil and rare;
I’ll certainly never let down my bright hair!)
Stop that sulking at once, Amanda!
You’re always so moody, Amanda!
Anyone would think that I nagged at you,
Amanda!
-ROBIN KLEIN
Glossary:
languid: relaxed
drifting: moving slowly
pattern: make patterns
tranquil: calm
________________________________________________________________X-I

Glimpses of India
A Baker from Goa
This is a pen-portrait of a traditional Goan village baker who still
has an important place in his society.
OUR elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically
about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese
and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves
might have vanished but the makers are still there.
We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders
and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, timetested
furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces
has not yet been extinguished. The thud and jingle of
the traditional baker’s bamboo, heralding his arrival
in the morning, can still be heard in some places.
Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries
on the family profession. These bakers are, even today,
known as pader in Goa.
During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to
be our friend, companion and guide. He used to
come at least twice a day. Once, when he set out in
the morning on his selling round, and then again,
when he returned after emptying his huge basket.
The jingling thud of his bamboo woke us up from
sleep and we ran to meet and greet him. Why was
it so? Was it for the love of the loaf? Not at all. The
loaves were bought by some Paskine or Bastine,
the maid-servant of the house! What we longed for
were those bread-bangles which we chose carefully.
Sometimes it was sweet bread of special make.
The baker made his musical entry on the scene
with the ‘jhang, jhang’ sound of his specially made
bamboo staff. One hand supported the basket on
his head and the other banged the bamboo on the
ground. He would greet the lady of the house with
“Good morning” and then place his basket on the
vertical bamboo. We kids would be pushed aside
with a mild rebuke and the loaves would be delivered
to the servant. But we would not give up. We would
climb a bench or the parapet and peep into the
basket, somehow. I can still recall the typical
fragrance of those loaves. Loaves for the elders and
the bangles for the children. Then we did not even
care to brush our teeth or wash our mouths
properly. And why should we? Who would take the
trouble of plucking the mango-leaf for the
toothbrush? And why was it necessary at all? The
tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash
and clean up everything so nicely, after all!
Marriage gifts are meaningless without the sweet
bread known as the bol, just as a party or a feast
loses its charm without bread. Not enough can be
said to show how important a baker can be for a
village. The lady of the house must prepare
sandwiches on the occasion of her daughter’s
engagement. Cakes and bolinhas are a must for
Christmas as well as other festivals. Thus, the
presence of the baker’s furnace in the village is
absolutely essential.
The baker or bread-seller of those days had a
peculiar dress known as the kabai. It was a singlepiece
long frock reaching down to the knees. In our
childhood we saw bakers wearing a shirt and
trousers which were shorter than full-length ones
and longer than half pants. Even today, anyone
who wears a half pant which reaches just below
the knees invites the comment that he is dressed
like a pader!
The baker usually collected his bills at the end
of the month. Monthly accounts used to be recorded
on some wall in pencil. Baking was indeed a
profitable profession in the old days. The baker and
his family never starved. He, his family and his
servants always looked happy and prosperous. Their
plump physique was an open testimony to this. Even
today any person with a jackfruit-like physical
appearance is easily compared to a baker.
Coorg
Coorg is coffee country, famous for its rainforests and spices
MIDWAY between Mysore and the coastal town of
Mangalore sits a piece of heaven that must have
drifted from the kingdom of god. This land of rolling
hills is inhabited by a proud race of martial men,
beautiful women and wild creatures.
Coorg, or Kodagu, the smallest district of
Karnataka, is home to evergreen rainforests, spices
and coffee plantations. Evergreen rainforests cover
thirty per cent of this district. During the monsoons,
it pours enough to keep many visitors away. The
season of joy commences from September and
continues till March. The weather is perfect, with
some showers thrown in for
good measure. The air
breathes of invigorating
coffee. Coffee estates and
colonial bungalows stand
tucked under tree canopies
in prime corners.
The fiercely independent
people of Coorg are possibly
of Greek or Arabic descent.
As one story goes, a part of
Alexander’s army moved
south along the coast and
settled here when return
became impractical. These
people married amongst the
locals and their culture is
apparent in the martial
traditions, marriage and
religious rites, which are
distinct from the Hindu
mainstream. The theory of
Arab origin draws support
from the long, black coat
with an embroidered waist-belt worn by the Kodavus.
Known as kuppia, it resembles the kuffia worn by
the Arabs and the Kurds.
Coorgi homes have a tradition of hospitality, and
they are more than willing to recount numerous
tales of valour related to their sons and fathers.
The Coorg Regiment is one of the most decorated in
the Indian Army, and the first Chief of the Indian
Army, General Cariappa, was a Coorgi. Even now,
Kodavus are the only people in India permitted to
carry firearms without a licence.
The river, Kaveri, obtains its water from the hills
and forests of Coorg. Mahaseer — a large freshwater
fish — abound in these waters. Kingfishers dive for
their catch, while squirrels and langurs drop
partially eaten fruit for the mischief of enjoying the
splash and the ripple effect in the clear water.
Elephants enjoy being bathed and scrubbed in the
river by their mahouts.
The most laidback individuals become converts
to the life of high-energy adventure with river rafting,
canoeing, rappelling, rock climbing and mountain
biking. Numerous walking trails in this region are
a favourite with trekkers.
Birds, bees and butterflies are there to give you
company. Macaques, Malabar squirrels, langurs and
slender loris keep a watchful eye from the tree canopy.
I do, however, prefer to step aside for wild elephants.
The climb to the Brahmagiri hills brings you
into a panoramic view of the entire misty landscape
of Coorg. A walk across the rope bridge leads to the
sixty-four-acre island of Nisargadhama. Running
into Buddhist monks from India’s largest Tibetan
settlement, at nearby Bylakuppe, is a bonus. The
monks, in red, ochre and yellow robes, are amongst
the many surprises that wait to be discovered by
visitors searching for the heart and soul of India,
right here in Coorg.
Tea from Assam
Pranjol, a youngster from Assam, is Rajvir’s classmate at school
in Delhi. Pranjol’s father is the manager of a tea-garden in Upper
Assam and Pranjol has invited Rajvir to visit his home during the
summer vacation.
“CHAI-GARAM... garam-chai,” a vendor called out in a
high-pitched voice.
He came up to their window and asked,”Chai, sa’ab?”
“Give us two cups,” Pranjol said.
They sipped the steaming hot liquid. Almost
everyone in their compartment was drinking tea too.
“Do you know that over eighty crore cups of tea
are drunk every day throughout the world?” Rajvir said.
“Whew!” exclaimed Pranjol. “Tea really is very
popular.”
The train pulled out of the station. Pranjol buried
his nose in his detective book again. Rajvir too was
an ardent fan of detective stories, but at the moment
he was keener on looking at the beautiful scenery.
It was green, green everywhere. Rajvir had never
seen so much greenery before. Then the soft green
paddy fields gave way to tea bushes.
It was a magnificent view. Against the backdrop
of densely wooded hills a sea of tea bushes stretched
as far as the eye could see. Dwarfing the tiny tea
plants were tall sturdy shade-trees and amidst the
orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures.
In the distance was an ugly building with smoke
billowing out of tall chimneys.
“Hey, a tea garden!” Rajvir cried excitedly.
Pranjol, who had been born and brought up on
a plantation, didn’t share Rajvir’s excitement.
“Oh, this is tea country now,” he said. “Assam has
the largest concentration of plantations in the world.
You will see enough gardens to last you a lifetime!”
“I have been reading as much as I could about
tea,” Rajvir said. “No one really knows who
discovered tea but there are many legends.”
“What legends?”
“Well, there’s the one about the Chinese emperor
who always boiled water before drinking it. One
day a few leaves of the twigs burning under the pot
fell into the water giving it a delicious flavour. It is
said they were tea leaves.”
“Tell me another!” scoffed Pranjol.
“We have an Indian legend too. Bodhidharma, an
ancient Buddhist ascetic, cut off his eyelids because
he felt sleepy during meditations. Ten tea plants
grew out of the eyelids. The leaves of these plants
when put in hot water and drunk banished sleep.
“Tea was first drunk in China,” Rajvir added,
“as far back as 2700 B.C.! In fact words such as
tea, ‘chai’ and ‘chini’ are from Chinese. Tea came to
Europe only in the sixteenth century and was drunk
more as medicine than as beverage.”
The train clattered into Mariani junction. The
boys collected their luggage and pushed their way
to the crowded platform.
Pranjol’s parents were waiting for them.
Soon they were driving towards Dhekiabari, the
tea-garden managed by Pranjol’s father.
An hour later the car veered sharply off the main
road. They crossed a cattle-bridge and entered
Dhekiabari Tea Estate.
On both sides of the gravel-road were acre upon
acre of tea bushes, all neatly pruned to the same
height. Groups of tea-pluckers, with bamboo baskets
on their backs, wearing plastic aprons, were
plucking the newly sprouted leaves.
Pranjol’s father slowed down to allow a tractor,
pulling a trailer-load of tea leaves, to pass.
“This is the second-flush or sprouting period,
isn’t it, Mr Barua?” Rajvir asked. “It lasts from May
to July and yields the best tea.”
“You seem to have done your homework before
coming,” Pranjol’s father said in surprise.
“Yes, Mr Barua,” Rajvir admitted. “But I hope to
learn much more while I’m here.”;

The Trees
The trees inside are moving out into the forest,
the forest that was empty all these days
where no bird could sit
no insect hide
no sun bury its feet in shadow
the forest that was empty all these nights
will be full of trees by morning.
All night the roots work
to disengage themselves from the cracks
in the veranda floor.
The leaves strain toward the glass
small twigs stiff with exertion
long-cramped boughs shuffling under the roof
like newly discharged patients
half-dazed, moving
to the clinic doors.
I sit inside, doors open to the veranda
writing long letters
in which I scarcely mention the departure
of the forest from the house.
The night is fresh, the whole moon shines
in a sky still open
the smell of leaves and lichen
still reaches like a voice into the rooms.
My head is full of whispers
which tomorrow will be silent.
Listen. The glass is breaking.
The trees are stumbling forward
into the night. Winds rush to meet them.
The moon is broken like a mirror,
its pieces flash now in the crown
of the tallest oak.
-ADRIENNE RICH
Glossary:
to disengage themselves: to separate themselves
strain: make efforts to move
bough: branch
shuffling: moving repeatedly from one position to another
lichen: crusty patches or bushy growth on tree trunks/bare ground formed by
association of fungus and alga.;

Mijbil the Otter

EARLY in the New Year of 1956 I travelled to Southern
Iraq. By then it had crossed my mind that I should
like to keep an otter instead of a dog, and that
Camusfearna, ringed by water a stone’s throw from
its door, would be an eminently suitable spot for
this experiment.
When I casually mentioned this to a friend, he
as casually replied that I had better get one in the
Tigris marshes, for there they were as common as
mosquitoes, and were often tamed by the Arabs.
We were going to Basra to the Consulate-General
to collect and answer our mail from Europe. At the
Consulate-General we found that my friend’s mail
had arrived but that mine had not.
I cabled to England, and when, three days later,
nothing had happened, I tried to telephone. The call
had to be booked twenty-four hours in advance. On
the first day the line was out of order; on the second
the exchange was closed for a religious holiday. On
the third day there was another breakdown. My
friend left, and I arranged to meet him in a week’s
time. Five days later, my mail arrived.
I carried it to my bedroom to read, and there,
squatting on the floor, were two Arabs; beside them
lay a sack that squirmed from time to time. They
handed me a note from my friend: “Here is your otter...”
II
With the opening of that sack began a phase of my
life that has not yet ended, and may, for all I know,
not end before I do. It is, in effect, a thraldom to
otters, an otter fixation, that I have since found to
be shared by most other people, who have ever
owned one.
The creature that emerged from this sack on to
the spacious tiled floor of the Consulate bedroom
resembled most of all a very small, medievallyconceived,
dragon. From the head to the tip of the tail he was coated with symmetrical pointed scales
of mud armour, between whose tips was visible a
soft velvet fur like that of a chocolate-brown mole.
He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of
dust, but in fact it was not for another month that I
managed to remove the last of the mud and see the
otter, as it were, in his true colours.
Mijbil, as I called the otter, was, in fact, of a
race previously unknown to science, and was at
length christened by zoologists Lutrogale perspicillata
maxwelli, or Maxwell’s otter. For the first twentyfour
hours Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly;
he was simply aloof and indifferent, choosing to
sleep on the floor as far from my bed as possible.
The second night Mijbil came on to my bed in the
small hours and remained asleep in the crook of
my knees until the servant brought tea in the
morning, and during the day he began to lose his
apathy and take a keen, much too keen, interest in
his surroundings. I made a body-belt for him and
took him on a lead to the bathroom, where for half
an hour he went wild with joy in the water, plunging
and rolling in it, shooting up and down the length
of the bathtub underwater, and making enough slosh
and splash for a hippo. This, I was to learn, is a
characteristic of otters; every drop of water must
be, so to speak, extended and spread about the
place; a bowl must at once be overturned, or, if it
will not be overturned, be sat in and sploshed in
until it overflows. Water must be kept on the move
and made to do things; when static it is wasted
and provoking.
Two days later, Mijbil escaped from my bedroom
as I entered it, and I turned to see his tail
disappearing round the bend of the corridor that
led to the bathroom. By the time I got there he was
up on the end of the bathtub and fumbling at the
chromium taps with his paws. I watched, amazed;
in less than a minute he had turned the tap far
enough to produce a trickle of water, and after a
moment or two achieved the full flow. (He had been
lucky to turn the tap the right way; on later
occasions he would sometimes screw it up still
tighter, chittering with irritation and disappointment
at the tap’s failure to cooperate.)
Very soon Mij would follow me without a lead
and come to me when I called his name. He spent
most of his time in play. He spent hours shuffling a
rubber ball round the room like a four-footed soccer
player using all four feet to dribble the ball, and he
could also throw it, with a powerful flick of the
neck, to a surprising height and distance. But the
real play of an otter is when he lies on his back
and juggles with small objects between his paws.
Marbles were Mij’s favourite toys for this pastime:
he would lie on his back rolling two or more of them
up and down his wide, flat belly without ever
dropping one to the floor.
The days passed peacefully at Basra, but I dreaded
the prospect of transporting Mij to England, and to
Camusfearna. The British airline to London would
not fly animals, so I booked a flight to Paris on
another airline, and from there to London. The
airline insisted that Mij should be packed into a
box not more than eighteen inches square, to be
carried on the floor at my feet. I had a box made,
and an hour before we started, I put Mij into the
box so that he would become accustomed to it, and
left for a hurried meal.
When I returned, there was an appalling
spectacle. There was complete silence from the box,
but from its airholes and chinks around the lid,
blood had trickled and dried. I whipped off the lock
and tore open the lid, and Mij, exhausted and bloodspattered,
whimpered and caught at my leg. He had
torn the lining of the box to shreds; when I removed
the last of it so that there were no cutting edges
left, it was just ten minutes until the time of the
flight, and the airport was five miles distant. I put
the miserable Mij back into the box, holding down
the lid with my hand.
I sat in the back of the car with the box beside
me as the driver tore through the streets of Basra
like a ricochetting bullet. The aircraft was waiting
to take off; I was rushed through to it by infuriated
officials. Luckily, the seat booked for me was at
the extreme front. I covered the floor around my
feet with newspapers, rang for the air hostess,
and gave her a parcel of fish (for Mij) to keep in a
cool place. I took her into my confidence about the
events of the last half hour. I have retained the
most profound admiration for that air hostess; she
was the very queen of her kind. She suggested
that I might prefer to have my pet on my knee, and
I could have kissed her hand in the depth of my
gratitude. But, not knowing otters, I was quite
unprepared for what followed.
Mij was out of the box in a flash. He disappeared
at high speed down the aircraft. There were squawks
and shrieks, and a woman stood up on her seat
screaming out, “A rat! A rat!” I caught sight of Mij’s
tail disappearing beneath the legs of a portly whiteturbaned
Indian. Diving for it, I missed, but found
my face covered in curry. “Perhaps,” said the air
hostess with the most charming smile, “it would be
better if you resumed your seat, and I will find the
animal and bring it to you.”
I returned to my seat. I was craning my neck
trying to follow the hunt when suddenly I heard
from my feet a distressed chitter of recognition and
welcome, and Mij bounded on to my knee and began
to nuzzle my face and my neck.
After an eventful journey, Maxwell and his otter reach London, where
he has a flat.
Mij and I remained in London for nearly a month.
He would play for hours with a selection of toys,
ping-pong balls, marbles, rubber fruit, and a
terrapin shell that I had brought back from his native
marshes. With the ping-pong ball he invented a
game of his own which could keep him engrossed
for up to half an hour at a time. A suitcase that I
had taken to Iraq had become damaged on the
journey home, so that the lid, when closed,
remained at a slope from one end to the other. Mij
discovered that if he placed the ball on the high
end it would run down the length of the suitcase.
He would dash around to the other end to ambush
its arrival, hide from it, crouching, to spring up
and take it by surprise, grab it and trot off with it
to the high end once more.
Outside the house I exercised him on a lead,
precisely as if he had been a dog. Mij quickly developed
certain compulsive habits on these walks in the
London streets, like the rituals of children who on
their way to and from school must place their feet
squarely on the centre of each paving block; must
touch every seventh upright of the iron railings, or
pass to the outside of every second lamp post. Opposite
to my flat was a single-storied primary school, along
whose frontage ran a low wall some two feet high. On
his way home, but never on his way out, Mij would
tug me to this wall, jump on to it, and gallop the full
length of its thirty yards, to the hopeless distraction
both of pupils and of staff within.
It is not, I suppose, in any way strange that the
average Londoner should not recognise an otter, but
the variety of guesses as to what kind of animal this
might be came as a surprise to me. Otters belong to
a comparatively small group of animals called
Mustellines, shared by the badger, mongoose, weasel,
stoat, mink and others. I faced a continuous barrage
of conjectural questions that sprayed all the
Mustellines but the otter; more random guesses hit
on ‘a baby seal’ and ‘a squirrel.’ ‘Is that a walrus,
mister?’ reduced me to giggles, and outside a dog
show I heard ‘a hippo’. A beaver, a bear cub, a leopard
— one, apparently, that had changed its spots —
and a ‘brontosaur’; Mij was anything but an otter.
But the question for which I awarded the highest
score came from a labourer digging a hole in the street.
I was still far from him when he laid down his tool,
put his hands on his hips, and began to stare. As I
drew nearer I saw his expression of surprise and
affront, as though he would have me know that he
was not one upon whom to play jokes. I came abreast
of him; he spat, glared, and then growled out, “Here,
Mister — what is that supposed to be?”;


Fog
The fog comes
on little cat feet.
It sits looking
over harbour and city
on silent haunches
and then moves on.
-CARL SANDBURG
Glossary:
on haunches: sitting with knees bent;


Madam Rides the Bus
THERE was a girl named Valliammai who was called
Valli for short. She was eight years old and very
curious about things. Her favourite pastime was
standing in the front doorway of her house,
watching what was happening in the street outside.
There were no playmates of her own age on her
street, and this was about all she had to do.
But for Valli, standing at the front door was every
bit as enjoyable as any of the elaborate games other
children played. Watching the street gave her many
new unusual experiences.
The most fascinating thing of all was the bus
that travelled between her village and the nearest
town. It passed through her street each hour, once
going to the town and once coming back. The sight
of the bus, filled each time with a new set of
passengers, was a source of unending joy for Valli.
Day after day she watched the bus, and
gradually a tiny wish crept into her head and
grew there: she wanted to ride on that bus, even
if just once. This wish became stronger and
stronger, until it was an overwhelming desire.
Valli would stare wistfully at the people who got
on or off the bus when it stopped at the street
corner. Their faces would kindle in her longings,
dreams, and hopes. If one of her friends happened
to ride the bus and tried to describe the sights of
the town to her, Valli would be too jealous to listen
and would shout, in English: “Proud! proud!”
Neither she nor her friends really understood the
meaning of the word, but they used it often as a
slang expression of disapproval.
Over many days and months Valli listened
carefully to conversations between her neighbours
and people who regularly used the bus, and she also
asked a few discreet questions here and there. This
way she picked up various small details about the
bus journey. The town was six miles from her village.
The fare was thirty paise one way — “which is almost
nothing at all,” she heard one well-dressed man say,
but to Valli, who scarcely saw that much money
from one month to the next, it seemed a fortune. The
trip to the town took forty-five minutes. On reaching
town, if she stayed in her seat and paid another
thirty paise, she could return home on the same
bus. This meant that she could take the one-o’clock
afternoon bus, reach the town at one forty-five, and
be back home by about two forty-five...
On and on went her thoughts as she calculated
and recalculated, planned and replanned.
Well, one fine spring day the afternoon bus was
just on the point of leaving the village and turning
into the main highway when a small voice was heard
shouting: “Stop the bus! Stop the bus!” And a tiny
hand was raised commandingly.
The bus slowed down to a crawl, and the
conductor, sticking his head out the door, said,
“Hurry then! Tell whoever it is to come quickly.”
“It’s me,” shouted Valli. “I’m the one who has to
get on.”
By now the bus had come to a stop, and the
conductor said, “Oh, really! You don’t say so!”
“Yes, I simply have to go to town,” said Valli,
still standing outside the bus, “and here’s my
money.” She showed him some coins.
“Okay, okay, but first you must get on the bus,”
said the conductor, and he stretched out a hand to
help her up.
“Never mind,” she said, “I can get on by myself.
You don’t have to help me.”
The conductor was a jolly sort, fond of joking. “Oh,
please don’t be angry with me, my fine madam,” he
said. “Here, have a seat right up there in front.
Everybody move aside please — make way for madam.”
It was the slack time of day, and there were
only six or seven passengers on the bus. They were
all looking at Valli and laughing with the conductor.
Valli was overcome with shyness. Avoiding
everyone’s eyes, she walked quickly to an empty
seat and sat down.
“May we start now, madam?” the conductor
asked, smiling. Then he blew his whistle twice, and
the bus moved forward with a roar.
It was a new bus, its outside painted a gleaming
white with some green stripes along the sides.
Inside, the overhead bars shone like silver. Directly
in front of Valli, above the windshield, there was a
beautiful clock. The seats were soft and luxurious.
Valli devoured everything with her eyes. But
when she started to look outside, she found her
view cut off by a canvas blind that covered the lower
part of her window. So she stood up on the seat
and peered over the blind.
The bus was now going along the bank of a canal.
The road was very narrow. On one side there was
the canal and, beyond it, palm trees, grassland,
distant mountains, and the blue, blue sky. On the
other side was a deep ditch and then acres and
acres of green fields — green, green, green, as far
as the eye could see.
Oh, it was all so wonderful!
Suddenly she was startled by a voice. “Listen,
child,” said the voice, “you shouldn’t stand like that.
Sit down.”Sitting down, she looked to see who had spoken.
It was an elderly man who had honestly been
concerned for her, but she was annoyed by
his attention.
“There’s nobody here who’s a child,” she said
haughtily. “I’ve paid my thirty paise like everyone
else.”
The conductor chimed in. “Oh, sir, but this is a
very grown-up madam. Do you think a mere girl
could pay her own fare and travel to the city
all alone?”
Valli shot an angry glance at the conductor and
said, “I am not a madam. Please remember that.
And you’ve not yet given me my ticket.”
“I’ll remember,” the conductor said, mimicking
her tone. Everyone laughed, and gradually Valli too
joined in the laughter.
The conductor punched a ticket and handed it
to her. “Just sit back and make yourself comfortable.
Why should you stand when you’ve paid for a seat?”
“Because I want to,” she answered, standing
up again.
“But if you stand on the seat, you may fall and
hurt yourself when the bus makes a sharp turn
or hits a bump. That’s why we want you to sit
down, child.”
“I’m not a child, I tell you,” she said irritably.
“I’m eight years old.”
“Of course, of course. How stupid of me! Eight
years — my!”
The bus stopped, some new passengers got on,
and the conductor got busy for a time. Afraid of
losing her seat, Valli finally sat down.
An elderly woman came and sat beside her. “Are
you all alone, dear?” she asked Valli as the bus
started again.
Valli found the woman absolutely repulsive — such
big holes she had in her ear lobes, and such ugly
earrings in them! And she could smell the betel nut
the woman was chewing and see the betel juice that
was threatening to spill over her lips at any moment.
Ugh! — who could be sociable with such a person?
“Yes, I’m travelling alone,” she answered curtly.
“And I’ve got a ticket too.”
“Yes, she’s on her way to town,” said the
conductor. “With a thirty-paise ticket.”
“Oh, why don’t you mind your own business,”
said Valli. But she laughed all the same, and the
conductor laughed too.
But the old woman went on with her drivel. “Is
it proper for such a young person to travel alone?
Do you know exactly where you’re going in town?
What’s the street? What’s the house number?”
“You needn’t bother about me. I can take care of
myself,” Valli said, turning her face towards the
window and staring out
Ugh! — who could be sociable with such a person?
“Yes, I’m travelling alone,” she answered curtly.
“And I’ve got a ticket too.”
“Yes, she’s on her way to town,” said the
conductor. “With a thirty-paise ticket.”
“Oh, why don’t you mind your own business,”
said Valli. But she laughed all the same, and the
conductor laughed too.
But the old woman went on with her drivel. “Is
it proper for such a young person to travel alone?
Do you know exactly where you’re going in town?
What’s the street? What’s the house number?”
“You needn’t bother about me. I can take care of
myself,” Valli said, turning her face towards the
window and staring out. Her first journey — what careful, painstaking,
elaborate plans she had had to make for it! She had
thriftily saved whatever stray coins came her way,
resisting every temptation to buy peppermints, toys,
balloons, and the like, and finally she had saved a
total of sixty paise. How difficult it had been,
particularly that day at the village fair, but she had
resolutely stifled a strong desire to ride the merrygo-
round, even though she had the money.
After she had enough money saved, her next
problem was how to slip out of the house without
her mother’s knowledge. But she managed this
without too much difficulty. Every day after lunch
her mother would nap from about one to four or so.
Valli always used these hours for her ‘excursions’
as she stood looking from the doorway of her house.
or sometimes even ventured out into the village;
today, these same hours could be used for her first
excursion outside the village.
The bus rolled on now cutting across a bare
landscape, now rushing through a tiny hamlet or
past an odd wayside shop. Sometimes the bus
seemed on the point of gobbling up another vehicle
that was coming towards them or a pedestrian
crossing the road. But lo! somehow it passed on
smoothly, leaving all obstacles safely behind. Trees
came running towards them but then stopped as
the bus reached them and simply stood there
helpless for a moment by the side of the road before
rushing away in the other direction.
Suddenly Valli clapped her hands with glee. A
young cow, tail high in the air, was running very
fast, right in the middle of the road, right in front
of the bus. The bus slowed to a crawl, and the driver
sounded his horn loudly again and again. But the
more he honked, the more frightened the animal
became and the faster it galloped — always right in
front of the bus.
Somehow this was very funny to Valli. She laughed
and laughed until there were tears in her eyes.
“Hey, lady, haven’t you laughed enough?” called,
the conductor. “Better save some for tomorrow.”
At last the cow moved off the road. And soon the
bus came to a railroad crossing. A speck of a train
could be seen in the distance, growing bigger and
bigger as it drew near. Then it rushed past the
crossing gate with a tremendous roar and rattle,
shaking the bus. Then the bus went on and passed
the train station. From there it traversed a busy,
well-laid-out shopping street and, turning, entered
a wider thoroughfare. Such big, bright-looking
shops! What glittering displays of clothes and other
merchandise! Such big crowds!
Struck dumb with wonder, Valli gaped at everything.
Then the bus stopped and everyone got off
except Valli.
“Hey, lady,” said the conductor, “aren’t you ready
to get off? This is as far as your thirty paise
takes you.”
“No,” Valli said, “I’m going back on this same
bus.” She took another thirty paise from her pocket
and handed the coins to the conductor.
“Why, is something the matter?”
“No, nothing’s the matter. I just felt like having
a bus ride, that’s all.”
“Don’t you want to have a look at the sights,
now that you’re here?”
“All by myself? Oh, I’d be much too afraid.”
Greatly amused by the girl’s way of speaking,
the conductor said, “But you weren’t afraid to come
in the bus.”
“Nothing to be afraid of about that,” she
answered.
“Well, then, why not go to that stall over there
and have something to drink? Nothing to be afraid
of about that either."
“Oh, no, I couldn’t do that.”
“Well, then, let me bring you a cold drink.”
“No, I don’t have enough money. Just give me
my ticket, that’s all.”
“It’ll be my treat and not cost you anything.”
“No, no,” she said firmly, “please, no.”
The conductor shrugged, and they waited until
it was time for the bus to begin the return journey.
Again there weren’t many passengers.
“Won’t your mother be looking for you?” the
conductor asked when he gave the girl her ticket.
“No, no one will be looking for me,” she said.
The bus started, and again there were the same
wonderful sights.
Valli wasn’t bored in the slightest and greeted
everything with the same excitement she’d felt the
first time. But suddenly she saw a young cow lying
dead by the roadside, just where it had been struck
by some fast-moving vehicle.
“Isn’t that the same cow that ran in front of the
bus on our trip to town?” she asked the conductor.
The conductor nodded, and she was overcome
with sadness. What had been a lovable, beautiful
creature just a little while ago had now suddenly
lost its charm and its life and looked so horrible, so
frightening as it lay there, legs spreadeagled, a fixed
stare in its lifeless eyes, blood all over...
The bus moved on. The memory of the dead cow
haunted her, dampening her enthusiasm. She no
longer wanted to look out the window.
She sat thus, glued to her seat, until the bus
reached her village at three forty. She stood up and
stretched herself. Then she turned to the conductor
and said, “Well, sir, 1 hope to see you again.”
“Okay, madam,” he answered her, smiling.
“Whenever you feel like a bus ride, come and join
us. And don’t forget to bring your fare.”
She laughed and jumped down from the bus.
Then away she went, running straight for home.
When she entered her house she found her
mother awake and talking to one of Valli’s aunts,
the one from South Street. This aunt was a real
chatterbox, never closing her mouth once she
started talking.
“And where have you been?” said her aunt when
Valli came in. She spoke very casually, not expecting
a reply. So Valli just smiled, and her mother and
aunt went on with their conversation.
“Yes, you’re right,” her mother said. “So many
things in our midst and in the world outside. How
can we possibly know about everything? And even
when we do know about something, we often can’t
understand it completely, can we?”
“Oh, yes!” breathed Valli.
“What?” asked her mother. “What’s that you say?”
“Oh,” said Valli, “I was just agreeing with what
you said about things happening without our
knowledge.”
“Just a chit of a girl, she is,” said her aunt, “and
yet look how she pokes her nose into our conversation,
just as though she were a grown lady.”
Valli smiled to herself. She didn’t want them to
understand her smile. But, then, there wasn’t much
chance of that, was there?
[Translated from the Tamil
by K. S. Sundaram
Illustrated by R. K. Laxman];

The tale of the custard dragon

Belinda lived in a little white house,
With a little black kitten and a little grey mouse,
And a little yellow dog and a little red wagon,
And a realio, trulio, little pet dragon.
Now the name of the little black kitten was Ink,
And the little grey mouse, she called him Blink,
And the little yellow dog was sharp as Mustard,
But the dragon was a coward, and she called him Custard.
Custard the dragon had big sharp teeth,
And spikes on top of him and scales underneath,
Mouth like a fireplace, chimney for a nose,
And realio, trulio daggers on his toes.
Belinda was as brave as a barrel full of bears,
And Ink and Blink chased lions down the stairs,
Mustard was as brave as a tiger in a rage,
But Custard cried for a nice safe cage.
Belinda tickled him, she tickled him unmerciful,
Ink, Blink and Mustard, they rudely called him Percival,
They all sat laughing in the little red wagon
At the realio, trulio, cowardly dragon.
Belinda giggled till she shook the house,
And Blink said Weeck! which is giggling for a mouse,
Ink and Mustard rudely asked his age,
When Custard cried for a nice safe cage.
Suddenly, suddenly they heard a nasty sound,
And Mustard growled, and they all looked around.
Meowch! cried Ink, and ooh! cried Belinda,
For there was a pirate, climbing in the winda.
Pistol in his left hand, pistol in his right,
And he held in his teeth a cutlass bright,
His beard was black, one leg was wood;
It was clear that the pirate meant no good.
Belinda paled, and she cried Help! Help!
But Mustard fled with a terrified yelp,
Ink trickled down to the bottom of the household,
And little mouse Blink strategically mouseholed.
But up jumped Custard, snorting like an engine,
Clashed his tail like irons in a dungeon,
With a clatter and a clank and a jangling squirm,
He went at the pirate like a robin at a worm.
The pirate gaped at Belinda’s dragon,
And gulped some grog from his pocket flagon,
He fired two bullets, but they didn’t hit,
And Custard gobbled him, every bit.
Belinda embraced him, Mustard licked him,
No one mourned for his pirate victim.
Ink and Blink in glee did gyrate
Around the dragon that ate the pirate.
But presently up spoke little dog Mustard,
I’d have been twice as brave if I hadn’t been flustered.
And up spoke Ink and up spoke Blink,
We’d have been three times as brave, we think,
And Custard said, I quite agree
That everybody is braver than me.
Belinda still lives in her little white house,
With her little black kitten and her little grey mouse,
And her little yellow dog and her little red wagon,
And her realio, trulio little pet dragon.
Belinda is as brave as a barrel full of bears,
And Ink and Blink chase lions down the stairs,
Mustard is as brave as a tiger in a rage,
But Custard keeps crying for a nice safe cage.
-OGDEN NASH
Glossary: 
grog: a drink typically drunk by sailors
gyrate: to move around in circles;

The Sermon of Banares

GAUTAMA Buddha (563 B.C.– 483 B.C.) began life as a
prince named Siddhartha Gautama, in northern
India. At twelve, he was sent away for schooling in
the Hindu sacred scriptures and four years later he
returned home to marry a princess. They had a son
and lived for ten years as befitted royalty. At about
the age of twenty-five, the Prince, heretofore shielded
from the sufferings of the world, while out hunting
chanced upon a sick man, then an aged man, then
a funeral procession, and finally a monk begging
for alms. These sights so moved him that he at
once went out into the world to seek enlightenment
concerning the sorrows he had witnessed.
He wandered for seven years and finally sat
down under a peepal tree, where he vowed to stay
until enlightenment came. Enlightened after seven
days, he renamed the tree the Bodhi Tree (Tree of
Wisdom) and began to teach and to share his new
understandings. At that point he became known as
the Buddha (the Awakened or the Enlightened). The
Buddha preached his first sermon at the city of
Benares, most holy of the dipping places on the River
Ganges; that sermon has been preserved and is given
here. It reflects the Buddha’s wisdom about one
inscrutable kind of suffering.
Kisa Gotami had an only son, and he died. In her grief
she carried the dead child to all her neighbours, asking
them for medicine, and the people said, “She has lost
her senses. The boy is dead.”
At length, Kisa Gotami met a man who replied to her
request, “I cannot give thee medicine for thy child, but I
know a physician who can.”
And the girl said, “Pray tell me, sir; who is it?” And
the man replied, "Go to Sakyamuni, the Buddha.”
Kisa Gotami repaired to the Buddha and cried, “Lord
and Master, give me the medicine that will cure my boy.”
The Buddha answered, “I want a handful of mustardseed.”
And when the girl in her joy promised to procure
it, the Buddha added, “The mustard-seed must be taken
from a house where no one has lost a child, husband,
parent or friend.”
Poor Kisa Gotami now went from house to house,
and the people pitied her and said, “Here is mustardseed;
take it!” But when she asked, “Did a son or
daughter, a father or mother, die in your family?” they
answered her, “Alas! the living are few, but the dead are
many. Do not remind us of our deepest grief.” And there
was no house but some beloved one had died in it.
Kisa Gotami became weary and hopeless, and sat
down at the wayside watching the lights of the city, as
they flickered up and were extinguished again. At last
the darkness of the night reigned everywhere. And she
considered the fate of men, that their lives flicker up
and are extinguished again. And she thought to herself,
“How selfish am I in my grief! Death is common to all;
yet in this valley of desolation there is a path that leads
him to immortality who has surrendered all selfishness.”
The Buddha said, ‘‘The life of mortals in this world
is troubled and brief and combined with pain. For there
is not any means by which those that have been born
can avoid dying; after reaching old age there is death; of
such a nature are living beings. As ripe fruits are early
in danger of falling, so mortals when born are always in
danger of death. As all earthen vessels made by the
potter end in being broken, so is the life of mortals. Both
young and adult, both those who are fools and those
who are wise, all fall into the power of death; all are
subject to death.
“Of those who, overcome by death, depart from life,
a father cannot save his son, nor kinsmen their relations.
Mark! while relatives are looking on and lamenting
deeply, one by one mortals are carried off, like an ox
that is led to the slaughter. So the world is afflicted with
death and decay, therefore the wise do not grieve,
knowing the terms of the world.
“Not from weeping nor from grieving will anyone
obtain peace of mind; on the contrary, his pain will be
the greater and his body will suffer. He will make himself
sick and pale, yet the dead are not saved by his
lamentation. He who seeks peace should draw out the
arrow of lamentation, and complaint, and grief. He who
has drawn out the arrow and has become composed
will obtain peace of mind; he who has overcome all
sorrow will become free from sorrow, and be blessed.”
[Source: Betty Renshaw
Values and Voices: A College Reader (1975)];

For Anne Gregory

“Never shall a young man,
Thrown into despair
By those great honey-coloured
Ramparts at your ear,
Love you for yourself alone
And not your yellow hair.”
“But I can get a hair-dye
And set such colour there,
Brown, or black, or carrot,
That young men in despair
May love me for myself alone
And not my yellow hair.”
“I heard an old religious man
But yesternight declare
That he had found a text to prove
That only God, my dear,
Could love you for yourself alone
And not your yellow hair.”

-WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS
Glossary: ramparts: the high, wide walls around a castle or fort, for example, the ramparts
of the Red Fort;


The Proposal

CHARACTERS


STEPAN STEPANOVITCH CHUBUKOV, a landowner

NATALYA STEPANOVNA, his daughter, twenty-five years old

IVAN VASSILEVITCH LOMOV, a neighbour of Chubukov, a large and hearty, but very suspicious landowner

SETTING


CHUBUKOV's country-house


[A drawing-room in CHUBUKOV'S house.]

[LOMOV enters, wearing a dress-jacket and white gloves. CHUBUKOV rises to meet him.]

CHUBUKOV: My dear fellow, whom do I see! Ivan Vassilevitch! I am extremely glad! [Squeezes his hand] Now this is a surprise, my darling ... How are you?

LOMOV: Thank you. And how may you be getting on?

CHUBUKOV: We just get along somehow, my angel, to your prayers, and so on. Sit down, please do. ... Now, you know, you shouldn't forget all about your neighbours, my darling. My dear fellow, why are you so formal in your get-up? Evening dress, gloves, and so on. Can you be going anywhere, my treasure?

LOMOV: No, I've come only to see you, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch.

CHUBUKOV: Then why are you in evening dress, my precious? As if you're paying a New Year's Eve visit!

LOMOV: Well, you see, it's like this. [Takes his arm] I've come to you, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, to trouble you with a request. Not once or twice have I already had the privilege of applying to you for help, and you have always, so to speak ... I must ask your pardon, I am getting excited. I shall drink some water, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch. [Drinks.]

CHUBUKOV: [Aside] He's come to borrow money! Shan't give him any! [Aloud] What is it, my beauty?

LOMOV: You see, Honour Stepanitch ... I beg pardon, Stepan Honouritch ... I mean, I'm awfully excited, as you will please notice. ... In short, you alone can help me, though I don't deserve it, of course ... and haven't any right to count on your assistance. ...

CHUBUKOV: Oh, don't go round and round it, darling! Spit it out! Well?

LOMOV: One moment ... this very minute. The fact is, I've come to ask the hand of your daughter, Natalya Stepanovna, in marriage.

CHUBUKOV: [Joyfully] By Jove! Ivan Vassilevitch! Say it again--I didn't hear it all!

LOMOV: I have the honour to ask ...

CHUBUKOV: [Interrupting] My dear fellow ... I'm so glad, and so on. ... Yes, indeed, and all that sort of thing. [Embraces and kisses LOMOV] I've been hoping for it for a long time. It's been my continual desire. [Sheds a tear] And I've always loved you, my angel, as if you were my own son. May God give you both His help and His love and so on, and I did so much hope ... What am I behaving in this idiotic way for? I'm off my balance with joy, absolutely off my balance! Oh, with all my soul ... I'll go and call Natasha, and all that.

LOMOV: [Greatly moved] Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you think I may count on her consent?

CHUBUKOV: Why, of course, my darling, and ... as if she won't consent! She's in love; egad, she's like a love-sick cat, and so on. ... Shan't be long! [Exit.]

LOMOV: It's cold ... I'm trembling all over, just as if I'd got an examination before me. The great thing is, I must have my mind made up. If I give myself time to think, to hesitate, to talk a lot, to look for an ideal, or for real love, then I'll never get married. ... Brr! ... It's cold! Natalya Stepanovna is an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking, well-educated. ... What more do I want? But I'm getting a noise in my ears from excitement. [Drinks] And it's impossible for me not to marry. ... In the first place, I'm already 35--a critical age, so to speak. In the second place, I ought to lead a quiet and regular life. ... I suffer from palpitations, I'm excitable and always getting awfully upset. ... At this very moment my lips are trembling, and there's a twitch in my right eyebrow. ... But the very worst of all is the way I sleep. I no sooner get into bed and begin to go off when suddenly something in my left side gives a pull, and I can feel it in my shoulder and head. ... I jump up like a lunatic, walk about a bit, and lie down again, but as soon as I begin to get off to sleep there's another pull! And this may happen twenty times. ...

[NATALYA STEPANOVNA comes in.]

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Well, there! It's you, and papa said, "Go; there's a merchant come for his goods." How do you do, Ivan Vassilevitch!

LOMOV: How do you do, honoured Natalya Stepanovna?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: You must excuse my apron and néligé ... we're shelling peas for drying. Why haven't you been here for such a long time? Sit down. [They seat themselves] Won't you have some lunch?

LOMOV: No, thank you, I've had some already.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Then smoke. ... Here are the matches. ... The weather is splendid now, but yesterday it was so wet that the workmen didn't do anything all day. How much hay have you stacked? Just think, I felt greedy and had a whole field cut, and now I'm not at all pleased about it because I'm afraid my hay may rot. I ought to have waited a bit. But what's this? Why, you're in evening dress! Well, I never! Are you going to a ball, or what?--though I must say you look better. Tell me, why are you got up like that?

LOMOV: [Excited] You see, honoured Natalya Stepanovna ... the fact is, I've made up my mind to ask you to hear me out. ... Of course you'll be surprised and perhaps even angry, but a ... [Aside] It's awfully cold!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What's the matter? [Pause] Well?

LOMOV: I shall try to be brief. You must know, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, that I have long, since my childhood, in fact, had the privilege of knowing your family. My late aunt and her husband, from whom, as you know, I inherited my land, always had the greatest respect for your father and your late mother. The Lomovs and the Chubukovs have always had the most friendly, and I might almost say the most affectionate, regard for each other. And, as you know, my land is a near neighbour of yours. You will remember that my Oxen Meadows touch your birchwoods.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Excuse my interrupting you. You say, "my Oxen Meadows. ..." But are they yours?

LOMOV: Yes, mine.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What are you talking about? Oxen Meadows are ours, not yours!

LOMOV: No, mine, honoured Natalya Stepanovna.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Well, I never knew that before. How do you make that out?

LOMOV: How? I'm speaking of those Oxen Meadows which are wedged in between your birchwoods and the Burnt Marsh.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Yes, yes. ... They're ours.

LOMOV: No, you're mistaken, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, they're mine.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Just think, Ivan Vassilevitch! How long have they been yours?

LOMOV: How long? As long as I can remember.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Really, you won't get me to believe that!

LOMOV: But you can see from the documents, honoured Natalya Stepanovna. Oxen Meadows, it's true, were once the subject of dispute, but now everybody knows that they are mine. There's nothing to argue about. You see, my aunt's grandmother gave the free use of these Meadows in perpetuity to the peasants of your father's grandfather, in return for which they were to make bricks for her. The peasants belonging to your father's grandfather had the free use of the Meadows for forty years, and had got into the habit of regarding them as their own, when it happened that ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: No, it isn't at all like that! Both my grandfather and great-grandfather reckoned that their land extended to Burnt Marsh--which means that Oxen Meadows were ours. I don't see what there is to argue about. It's simply silly!

LOMOV: I'll show you the documents, Natalya Stepanovna!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: No, you're simply joking, or making fun of me. ... What a surprise! We've had the land for nearly three hundred years, and then we're suddenly told that it isn't ours! Ivan Vassilevitch, I can hardly believe my own ears. ... These Meadows aren't worth much to me. They only come to five dessiatins [Note: 13.5 acres], and are worth perhaps 300 roubles [Note: £30.], but I can't stand unfairness. Say what you will, but I can't stand unfairness.

LOMOV: Hear me out, I implore you! The peasants of your father's grandfather, as I have already had the honour of explaining to you, used to bake bricks for my aunt's grandmother. Now my aunt's grandmother, wishing to make them a pleasant ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I can't make head or tail of all this about aunts and grandfathers and grandmothers! The Meadows are ours, and that's all.

LOMOV: Mine

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Ours! You can go on proving it for two days on end, you can go and put on fifteen dress-jackets, but I tell you they're ours, ours, ours! I don't want anything of yours and I don't want to give up anything of mine. So there!

LOMOV: Natalya Ivanovna, I don't want the Meadows, but I am acting on principle. If you like, I'll make you a present of them.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I can make you a present of them myself, because they're mine! Your behaviour, Ivan Vassilevitch, is strange, to say the least! Up to this we have always thought of you as a good neighbour, a friend: last year we lent you our threshing-machine, although on that account we had to put off our own threshing till November, but you behave to us as if we were gipsies. Giving me my own land, indeed! No, really, that's not at all neighbourly! In my opinion, it's even impudent, if you want to know....

LOMOV: Then you make out that I'm a land-grabber? Madam, never in my life have I grabbed anybody else's land, and I shan't allow anybody to accuse me of having done so. ... [Quickly steps to the carafe and drinks more water] Oxen Meadows are mine!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It's not true, they're ours!

LOMOV: Mine!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It's not true! I'll prove it! I'll send my mowers out to the Meadows this very day!

LOMOV: What?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: My mowers will be there this very day!

LOMOV: I'll give it to them in the neck!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: You dare!

LOMOV: [Clutches at his heart] Oxen Meadows are mine! You understand? Mine!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Please don't shout! You can shout yourself hoarse in your own house, but here I must ask you to restrain yourself!

LOMOV: If it wasn't, madam, for this awful, excruciating palpitation, if my whole inside wasn't upset, I'd talk to you in a different way! [Yells] Oxen Meadows are mine!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Ours!

LOMOV: Mine!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Ours!

LOMOV: Mine!

[Enter CHUBUKOV.]

CHUBUKOV: What's the matter? What are you shouting at?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Papa, please tell to this gentleman who owns Oxen Meadows, we or he?

CHUBUKOV: [To LOMOV] Darling, the Meadows are ours!

LOMOV: But, please, Stepan Stepanitch, how can they be yours? Do be a reasonable man! My aunt's grandmother gave the Meadows for the temporary and free use of your grandfather's peasants. The peasants used the land for forty years and got as accustomed to it as if it was their own, when it happened that ...

CHUBUKOV: Excuse me, my precious. ... You forget just this, that the peasants didn't pay your grandmother and all that, because the Meadows were in dispute, and so on. And now everybody knows that they're ours. It means that you haven't seen the plan.

LOMOV: I'll prove to you that they're mine!

CHUBUKOV: You won't prove it, my darling.

LOMOV: I shall!

CHUBUKOV: Dear one, why yell like that? You won't prove anything just by yelling. I don't want anything of yours, and don't intend to give up what I have. Why should I? And you know, my beloved, that if you propose to go on arguing about it, I'd much sooner give up the meadows to the peasants than to you. There!

LOMOV: I don't understand! How have you the right to give away somebody else's property?

CHUBUKOV: You may take it that I know whether I have the right or not. Because, young man, I'm not used to being spoken to in that tone of voice, and so on: I, young man, am twice your age, and ask you to speak to me without agitating yourself, and all that.

LOMOV: No, you just think I'm a fool and want to have me on! You call my land yours, and then you want me to talk to you calmly and politely! Good neighbours don't behave like that, Stepan Stepanitch! You're not a neighbour, you're a grabber!

CHUBUKOV: What's that? What did you say?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Papa, send the mowers out to the Meadows at once!

CHUBUKOV: What did you say, sir?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Oxen Meadows are ours, and I shan't give them up, shan't give them up, shan't give them up!

LOMOV: We'll see! I'll have the matter taken to court, and then I'll show you!

CHUBUKOV: To court? You can take it to court, and all that! You can! I know you; you're just on the look-out for a chance to go to court, and all that. ... You pettifogger! All your people were like that! All of them!

LOMOV: Never mind about my people! The Lomovs have all been honourable people, and not one has ever been tried for embezzlement, like your grandfather!

CHUBUKOV: You Lomovs have had lunacy in your family, all of you!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: All, all, all!

CHUBUKOV: Your grandfather was a drunkard, and your younger aunt, Nastasya Mihailovna, ran away with an architect, and so on.

LOMOV: And your mother was hump-backed. [Clutches at his heart] Something pulling in my side. ... My head. ... Help! Water!

CHUBUKOV: Your father was a guzzling gambler!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: And there haven't been many backbiters to equal your aunt!

LOMOV: My left foot has gone to sleep. ... You're an intriguer. ... Oh, my heart! ... And it's an open secret that before the last elections you bri ... I can see stars. ... Where's my hat?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It's low! It's dishonest! It's mean!

CHUBUKOV: And you're just a malicious, double-faced intriguer! Yes!

LOMOV: Here's my hat. ... My heart! ... Which way? Where's the door? Oh! ... I think I'm dying. ... My foot's quite numb. ...

[Goes to the door.]

CHUBUKOV: [Following him] And don't set foot in my house again!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Take it to court! We'll see!

[LOMOV staggers out.]

CHUBUKOV: Devil take him! [Walks about in excitement.]

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What a rascal! What trust can one have in one's neighbours after that!

CHUBUKOV: The villain! The scarecrow!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: The monster! First he takes our land and then he has the impudence to abuse us.

CHUBUKOV: And that blind hen, yes, that turnip-ghost has the confounded cheek to make a proposal, and so on! What? A proposal!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What proposal?

CHUBUKOV: Why, he came here so as to propose to you.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: To propose? To me? Why didn't you tell me so before?

CHUBUKOV: So he dresses up in evening clothes. The stuffed sausage! The wizen-faced frump!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: To propose to me? Ah! [Falls into an easy-chair and wails] Bring him back! Back! Ah! Bring him here.

CHUBUKOV: Bring whom here?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Quick, quick! I'm ill! Fetch him! [Hysterics.]

CHUBUKOV: What's that? What's the matter with you? [Clutches at his head] Oh, unhappy man that I am! I'll shoot myself! I'll hang myself! We've done for her!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I'm dying! Fetch him!

CHUBUKOV: Tfoo! At once. Don't yell!

[Runs out. A pause. NATALYA STEPANOVNA wails.]

NATALYA STEPANOVNA. What have they done to me! Fetch him back! Fetch him! [A pause.]

[CHUBUKOV runs in.]

CHUBUKOV: He's coming, and so on, devil take him! Ouf! Talk to him yourself; I don't want to. ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: [Wails] Fetch him!

CHUBUKOV: [Yells] He's coming, I tell you. Oh, what a burden, Lord, to be the father of a grown-up daughter! I'll cut my throat! I will, indeed! We cursed him, abused him, drove him out, and it's all you ... you!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: No, it was you!

CHUBUKOV: I tell you it's not my fault. [LOMOV appears at the door] Now you talk to him yourself [Exit.]

[LOMOV enters, exhausted.]

LOMOV: My heart's palpitating awfully. ... My foot's gone to sleep. ... There's something keeps pulling in my side.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Forgive us, Ivan Vassilevitch, we were all a little heated. ... I remember now: Oxen Meadows really are yours.

LOMOV: My heart's beating awfully. ... My Meadows. ... My eyebrows are both twitching. ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: The Meadows are yours, yes, yours. ... Do sit down. ... [They sit] We were wrong. ...

LOMOV: I did it on principle. ... My land is worth little to me, but the principle ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Yes, the principle, just so. ... Now let's talk of something else.

LOMOV: The more so as I have evidence. My aunt's grandmother gave the land to your father's grandfather's peasants ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Yes, yes, let that pass. ... [Aside] I wish I knew how to get him started. ... [Aloud] Are you going to start shooting soon?

LOMOV: I'm thinking of having a go at the blackcock, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, after the harvest. Oh, have you heard? Just think, what a misfortune I've had! My dog Guess, whom you know, has gone lame.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What a pity! Why?

LOMOV: I don't know. ... Must have got twisted, or bitten by some other dog. ... [Sighs] My very best dog, to say nothing of the expense. I gave Mironov 125 roubles for him.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It was too much, Ivan Vassilevitch.

LOMOV: I think it was very cheap. He's a first-rate dog.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Papa gave 85 roubles for his Squeezer, and Squeezer is heaps better than Guess!

LOMOV: Squeezer better than. Guess? What an idea! [Laughs] Squeezer better than Guess!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Of course he's better! Of course, Squeezer is young, he may develop a bit, but on points and pedigree he's better than anything that even Volchanetsky has got.

LOMOV. Excuse me, Natalya Stepanovna, but you forget that he is overshot, and an overshot always means the dog is a bad hunter!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Overshot, is he? The first time I hear it!

LOMOV: I assure you that his lower jaw is shorter than the upper.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Have you measured?

LOMOV: Yes. He's all right at following, of course, but if you want him to get hold of anything ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: In the first place, our Squeezer is a thoroughbred animal, the son of Harness and Chisels, while there's no getting at the pedigree of your dog at all. ... He's old and as ugly as a worn-out cab-horse.

LOMOV: He is old, but I wouldn't take five Squeezers for him. ... Why, how can you? ... Guess is a dog; as for Squeezer, well, it's too funny to argue. ... Anybody you like has a dog as good as Squeezer ... you may find them under every bush almost. Twenty-five roubles would be a handsome price to pay for him.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: There's some demon of contradiction in you today, Ivan Vassilevitch. First you pretend that the Meadows are yours; now, that Guess is better than Squeezer. I don't like people who don't say what they mean, because you know perfectly well that Squeezer is a hundred times better than your silly Guess. Why do you want to say it isn't?

LOMOV: I see, Natalya Stepanovna, that you consider me either blind or a fool. You must realize that Squeezer is overshot!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It's not true.

LOMOV: He is!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: It's not true!

LOMOV: Why shout, madam?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Why talk rot? It's awful! It's time your Guess was shot, and you compare him with Squeezer!

LOMOV: Excuse me; I cannot continue this discussion: my heart is palpitating.

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I've noticed that those hunters argue most who know least.

LOMOV: Madam, please be silent. ... My heart is going to pieces. ... [Shouts] Shut up!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I shan't shut up until you acknowledge that Squeezer is a hundred times better than your Guess!

LOMOV: A hundred times worse! Be hanged to your Squeezer! His head ... eyes ... shoulder ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: There's no need to hang your silly Guess; he's half-dead already!

LOMOV: [Weeps] Shut up! My heart's bursting!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I shan't shut up.

[Enter CHUBUKOV.]

CHUBUKOV: What's the matter now?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Papa, tell us truly, which is the better dog, our Squeezer or his Guess.

LOMOV: Stepan Stepanovitch, I implore you to tell me just one thing: is your Squeezer overshot or not? Yes or no?

CHUBUKOV: And suppose he is? What does it matter? He's the best dog in the district for all that, and so on.

LOMOV: But isn't my Guess better? Really, now?

CHUBUKOV: Don't excite yourself, my precious one. ... Allow me. ... Your Guess certainly has his good points. ... He's pure-bred, firm on his feet, has well-sprung ribs, and all that. But, my dear man, if you want to know the truth, that dog has two defects: he's old and he's short in the muzzle.

LOMOV: Excuse me, my heart. ... Let's take the facts. ... You will remember that on the Marusinsky hunt my Guess ran neck-and-neck with the Count's dog, while your Squeezer was left a whole verst behind.

CHUBUKOV: He got left behind because the Count's whipper-in hit him with his whip.

LOMOV: And with good reason. The dogs are running after a fox, when Squeezer goes and starts worrying a sheep!

CHUBUKOV: It's not true! ... My dear fellow, I'm very liable to lose my temper, and so, just because of that, let's stop arguing. You started because everybody is always jealous of everybody else's dogs. Yes, we're all like that! You too, sir, aren't blameless! You no sooner notice that some dog is better than your Guess than you begin with this, that ... and the other ... and all that. ... I remember everything!

LOMOV: I remember too!

CHUBUKOV: [Teasing him] I remember, too. ... What do you remember?

LOMOV: My heart ... my foot's gone to sleep. ... I can't ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: [Teasing] My heart. ... What sort of a hunter are you? You ought to go and lie on the kitchen oven and catch blackbeetles, not go after foxes! My heart!

CHUBUKOV: Yes really, what sort of a hunter are you, anyway? You ought to sit at home with your palpitations, and not go tracking animals. You could go hunting, but you only go to argue with people and interfere with their dogs and so on. Let's change the subject in case I lose my temper. You're not a hunter at all, anyway!

LOMOV: And are you a hunter? You only go hunting to get in with the Count and to intrigue. ... Oh, my heart! ... You're an intriguer!

CHUBUKOV: What? I an intriguer? [Shouts] Shut up!

LOMOV: Intriguer!

CHUBUKOV: Boy! Pup!

LOMOV: Old rat! Jesuit!

CHUBUKOV: Shut up or I'll shoot you like a partridge! You fool!

LOMOV: Everybody knows that--oh my heart!--your late wife used to beat you. ... My feet ... temples ... sparks. ... I fall, I fall!

CHUBUKOV: And you're under the slipper of your housekeeper!

LOMOV: There, there, there ... my heart's burst! My shoulder's come off. ... Where is my shoulder? I die. [Falls into an armchair] A doctor! [Faints.]

CHUBUKOV: Boy! Milksop! Fool! I'm sick! [Drinks water] Sick!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: What sort of a hunter are you? You can't even sit on a horse! [To her father] Papa, what's the matter with him? Papa! Look, papa! [Screams] Ivan Vassilevitch! He's dead!

CHUBUKOV: I'm sick! ... I can't breathe! ... Air!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: He's dead. [Pulls LOMOV'S sleeve] Ivan Vassilevitch! Ivan Vassilevitch! What have you done to me? He's dead. [Falls into an armchair] A doctor, a doctor! [Hysterics.]

CHUBUKOV: Oh! ... What is it? What's the matter?

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: [Wails] He's dead ... dead!

CHUBUKOV: Who's dead? [Looks at LOMOV] So he is! My word! Water! A doctor! [Lifts a tumbler to LOMOV'S mouth] Drink this! ... No, he doesn't drink. ... It means he's dead, and all that. ... I'm the most unhappy of men! Why don't I put a bullet into my brain? Why haven't I cut my throat yet? What am I waiting for? Give me a knife! Give me a pistol! [LOMOV moves] He seems to be coming round. ... Drink some water! That's right. ...

LOMOV: I see stars ... mist. ... Where am I?

CHUBUKOV: Hurry up and get married and--well, to the devil with you! She's willing! [He puts LOMOV'S hand into his daughter's] She's willing and all that. I give you my blessing and so on. Only leave me in peace!

LOMOV: [Getting up] Eh? What? To whom?

CHUBUKOV: She's willing! Well? Kiss and be damned to you!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: [Wails] He's alive. . . Yes, yes, I'm willing. ...

CHUBUKOV: Kiss each other!

LOMOV: Eh? Kiss whom? [They kiss] Very nice, too. Excuse me, what's it all about? Oh, now I understand ... my heart ... stars ... I'm happy. Natalya Stepanovna. ... [Kisses her hand] My foot's gone to sleep. ...

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: I ... I'm happy too. ...

CHUBUKOV: What a weight off my shoulders. ... Ouf!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: But ... still you will admit now that Guess is worse than Squeezer.

LOMOV: Better!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Worse!

CHUBUKOV: Well, that's a way to start your family bliss! Have some champagne!

LOMOV: He's better!

NATALYA STEPANOVNA: Worse! worse! worse!

CHUBUKOV: [Trying to shout her down] Champagne! Champagne!

CURTAIN;

________________________________________________________________________________________________X-II


The Portrait of a Lady

MY grandmother, like everybody’s grandmother, was an old
woman. She had been old and wrinkled for the twenty years
that I had known her. People said that she had once been
young and pretty and had even had a husband, but that was
hard to believe. My grandfather’s portrait hung above the
mantelpiece in the drawing room. He wore a big turban and
loose-fitting clothes. His long, white beard covered the best
part of his chest and he looked at least a hundred years old.
He did not look the sort of person who would have a wife or
children. He looked as if he could only have lots and lots of
grandchildren. As for my grandmother being young and pretty,
the thought was almost revolting. She often told us of the
games she used to play as a child. That seemed quite absurd
and undignified on her part and we treated it like the fables
of the Prophets she used to tell us.
She had always been short and fat and slightly bent. Her
face was a criss-cross of wrinkles running from everywhere to
everywhere. No, we were certain she had always been as we had
known her. Old, so terribly old that she could not have grown
older, and had stayed at the same age for twenty years. She
could never have been pretty; but she was always beautiful.
She hobbled about the house in spotless white with one hand
resting on her waist to balance her stoop and the other telling
the beads of her rosary. Her silver locks were scattered untidily
over her pale, puckered face, and her lips constantly moved in
inaudible prayer. Yes, she was beautiful. She was like the winter
landscape in the mountains, an expanse of pure white serenity
breathing peace and contentment.
My grandmother and I were good friends. My parents left me
with her when they went to live in the city and we were constantly
together. She used to wake me up in the morning and get me
ready for school. She said her morning prayer in a monotonous
sing-song while she bathed and dressed me in the hope that I
would listen and get to know it by heart; I listened because I
loved her voice but never bothered to learn it. Then she would
fetch my wooden slate which she had already washed and
plastered with yellow chalk, a tiny earthen ink-pot and a red
pen, tie them all in a bundle and hand it to me. After a breakfast
of a thick, stale chapatti with a little butter and sugar spread on
it, we went to school. She carried several stale chapattis with
her for the village dogs.
My grandmother always went to school with me because
the school was attached to the temple. The priest taught us
the alphabet and the morning prayer. While the children sat in
rows on either side of the verandah singing the alphabet or the
prayer in a chorus, my grandmother sat inside reading the
scriptures. When we had both finished, we would walk back
together. This time the village dogs would meet us at the temple
door. They followed us to our home growling and fighting with
each other for the chapattis we threw to them.
When my parents were comfortably settled in the city, they
sent for us. That was a turning-point in our friendship. Although
we shared the same room, my grandmother no longer came to
school with me. I used to go to an English school in a motor
bus. There were no dogs in the streets and she took to feeding
sparrows in the courtyard of our city house.
As the years rolled by we saw less of each other. For some
time she continued to wake me up and get me ready for school.
When I came back she would ask me what the teacher had
taught me. I would tell her English words and little things of
western science and learning, the law of gravity, Archimedes’
Principle, the world being round, etc. This made her unhappy.
She could not help me with my lessons. She did not believe in
the things they taught at the English school and was distressed
that there was no teaching about God and the scriptures. One
day I announced that we were being given music lessons. She
was very disturbed. To her music had lewd associations. It was
the monopoly of harlots and beggars and not meant for gentlefolk.
She said nothing but her silence meant disapproval. She rarely
talked to me after that.
When I went up to University, I was given a room of my own.
The common link of friendship was snapped. My grandmother
accepted her seclusion with resignation. She rarely left her
spinning-wheel to talk to anyone. From sunrise to sunset she
sat by her wheel spinning and reciting prayers. Only in the
afternoon she relaxed for a while to feed the sparrows. While
she sat in the verandah breaking the bread into little bits,
hundreds of little birds collected round her creating a veritable
bedlam of chirrupings. Some came and perched on her legs,
others on her shoulders. Some even sat on her head. She smiled
but never shooed them away. It used to be the happiest halfhour
of the day for her.
When I decided to go abroad for further studies, I was sure
my grandmother would be upset. I would be away for five years,
and at her age one could never tell. But my grandmother could.
She was not even sentimental. She came to leave me at the
railway station but did not talk or show any emotion. Her lips
moved in prayer, her mind was lost in prayer. Her fingers were
busy telling the beads of her rosary. Silently she kissed my
forehead, and when I left I cherished the moist imprint as perhaps
the last sign of physical contact between us.
But that was not so. After five years I came back home and
was met by her at the station. She did not look a day older. She
still had no time for words, and while she clasped me in her
arms I could hear her reciting her prayers. Even on the first day
of my arrival, her happiest moments were with her sparrows
whom she fed longer and with frivolous rebukes.
In the evening a change came over her. She did not pray.
She collected the women of the neighbourhood, got an old drum
and started to sing. For several hours she thumped the sagging
skins of the dilapidated drum and sang of the home-coming
of warriors. We had to persuade her to stop to avoid
overstraining. That was the first time since I had known her
that she did not pray.
The next morning she was taken ill. It was a mild fever and
the doctor told us that it would go. But my grandmother thought
differently. She told us that her end was near. She said that,
since only a few hours before the close of the last chapter of her
life she had omitted to pray, she was not going to waste any
more time talking to us.
We protested. But she ignored our protests. She lay peacefully
in bed praying and telling her beads. Even before we could
suspect, her lips stopped moving and the rosary fell from her
lifeless fingers. A peaceful pallor spread on her face and we knew
that she was dead.We lifted her off the bed and, as is customary, laid her on
the ground and covered her with a red shroud. After a few hours
of mourning we left her alone to make arrangements for her
funeral. In the evening we went to her room with a crude stretcher
to take her to be cremated. The sun was setting and had lit her
room and verandah with a blaze of golden light. We stopped
half-way in the courtyard. All over the verandah and in her room
right up to where she lay dead and stiff wrapped in the red
shroud, thousands of sparrows sat scattered on the floor. There
was no chirruping. We felt sorry for the birds and my mother
fetched some bread for them. She broke it into little crumbs,
the way my grandmother used to, and threw it to them. The
sparrows took no notice of the bread. When we carried my
grandmother’s corpse off, they flew away quietly. Next morning
the sweeper swept the bread crumbs into the dustbin.;

A Photograph
The cardboard shows me how it was
When the two girl cousins went paddling,
Each one holding one of my mother’s hands,
And she the big girl — some twelve years or so.
All three stood still to smile through their hair
At the uncle with the camera. A sweet face,
My mother’s, that was before I was born.
And the sea, which appears to have changed less,
Washed their terribly transient feet.
Some twenty — thirty — years later
She’d laugh at the snapshot. “See Betty
And Dolly,” she’d say, “and look how they
Dressed us for the beach.” The sea holiday
Was her past, mine is her laughter. Both wry
With the laboured ease of loss.
Now she’s been dead nearly as many years
As that girl lived. And of this circumstance
There is nothing to say at all.
Its silence silences.;



“We’re Not Afraid to Die...if We Can All Be Together”
IN July 1976, my wife Mary, son Jonathan, 6, daughter Suzanne,
7, and I set sail from Plymouth, England, to duplicate the roundthe-
world voyage made 200 years earlier by Captain James Cook.
For the longest time, Mary and I — a 37-year-old businessman —
had dreamt of sailing in the wake of the famous explorer, and
for the past 16 years we had spent all our leisure time honing
our seafaring skills in British waters.
Our boat Wavewalker, a 23 metre, 30 ton wooden-hulled
beauty, had been professionally built, and we had spent months
fitting it out and testing it in the roughest weather we could find.
The first leg of our planned three-year, 105,000 kilometre
journey passed pleasantly as we sailed down the west coast of
Africa to Cape Town. There, before heading east, we took on two
crewmen — American Larry Vigil and Swiss Herb Seigler — to
help us tackle one of the world’s roughest seas, the southern
Indian Ocean.
On our second day out of Cape Town, we began to encounter
strong gales. For the next few weeks, they blew continuously.
Gales did not worry me; but the size of the waves was alarming —
up to 15 metres, as high as our main mast.
December 25 found us 3,500 kilometres east of Cape Town.
Despite atrocious weather, we had a wonderful holiday complete
with a Christmas tree. New Year’s Day saw no improvement in
the weather, but we reasoned that it had to change soon. And it
did change — for the worse.
At dawn on January 2, the waves were gigantic. We were
sailing with only a small storm jib and were still making eight
knots. As the ship rose to the top of each wave we could see
endless enormous seas rolling towards us, and the screaming
of the wind and spray was painful to the ears. To slow the boat
down, we dropped the storm jib and lashed a heavy mooring
rope in a loop across the stern. Then we double-lashed
everything, went through our life-raft drill, attached lifelines,
donned oilskins and life jackets — and waited.
The first indication of impending disaster came at about
6 p.m., with an ominous silence. The wind dropped, and the
sky immediately grew dark. Then came a growing roar, and an
enormous cloud towered aft of the ship. With horror, I realised
that it was not a cloud, but a wave like no other I had ever seen.
It appeared perfectly vertical and almost twice the height of the
other waves, with a frightful breaking crest.
The roar increased to a thunder as the stern moved up the
face of the wave, and for a moment I thought we might ride over
it. But then a tremendous explosion shook the deck. A torrent
of green and white water broke over the ship, my head smashed
into the wheel and I was aware of flying overboard and sinking
below the waves. I accepted my approaching death, and as I
was losing consciousness, I felt quite peaceful.
Unexpectedly, my head popped out of the water. A few metres
away, Wavewalker was near capsizing, her masts almost
horizontal. Then a wave hurled her upright, my lifeline jerked
taut, I grabbed the guard rails and sailed through the air into
Wavewalker’s main boom. Subsequent waves tossed me around
the deck like a rag doll. My left ribs cracked; my mouth filled
with blood and broken teeth. Somehow, I found the wheel, lined
up the stern for the next wave and hung on.
Water, Water, Everywhere. I could feel that the ship had water
below, but I dared not abandon the wheel to investigate. Suddenly,
the front hatch was thrown open and Mary appeared. “We’re sinking!”
she screamed. “The decks are smashed; we’re full of water.”
“Take the wheel”, I shouted as I scrambled for the hatch.
Larry and Herb were pumping like madmen. Broken timbers
hung at crazy angles, the whole starboard side bulged inwards;
clothes, crockery, charts, tins and toys sloshed about in deep water.
I half-swam, half-crawled into the children’s cabin. “Are you
all right?” I asked. “Yes,” they answered from an upper bunk.
“But my head hurts a bit,” said Sue, pointing to a big bump
above her eyes. I had no time to worry about bumped heads.
After finding a hammer, screws and canvas, I struggled back
on deck. With the starboard side bashed open, we were taking
water with each wave that broke over us. If I couldn’t make
some repairs, we would surely sink.
Somehow I managed to stretch canvas and secure waterproof
hatch covers across the gaping holes. Some water continued to
stream below, but most of it was now being deflected over the side.
More problems arose when our hand pumps started to block
up with the debris floating around the cabins and the electric
pump short-circuited. The water level rose threateningly. Back
on deck I found that our two spare hand pumps had been
wrenched overboard — along with the forestay sail, the jib, the
dinghies and the main anchor.
Then I remembered we had another electric pump under
the chartroom floor. I connected it to an out-pipe, and was
thankful to find that it worked.
The night dragged on with an endless, bitterly cold routine
of pumping, steering and working the radio. We were getting no
replies to our Mayday calls — which was not surprising in this
remote corner of the world.
Sue’s head had swollen alarmingly; she had two enormous
black eyes, and now she showed us a deep cut on her arm.
When I asked why she hadn’t made more of her injuries before
this, she replied, “I didn’t want to worry you when you were
trying to save us all.”
By morning on January 3, the pumps had the water level
sufficiently under control for us to take two hours’ rest in
rotation. But we still had a tremendous leak somewhere below
the waterline and, on checking, I found that nearly all the boat’s
main rib frames were smashed down to the keel. In fact, there
was nothing holding up a whole section of the starboard hull
except a few cupboard partitions.
We had survived for 15 hours since the wave hit, but
Wavewalker wouldn’t hold together long enough for us to reach
Australia. I checked our charts and calculated that there were
two small islands a few hundred kilometres to the east. One of
them, Ile Amsterdam, was a French scientific base. Our only
hope was to reach these pinpricks in the vast ocean. But unless
the wind and seas abated so we could hoist sail, our chances
would be slim indeed. The great wave had put our auxilliary
engine out of action.
On January 4, after 36 hours of continuous pumping, we
reached the last few centimetres of water. Now, we had only to
keep pace with the water still coming in. We could not set any
sail on the main mast. Pressure on the rigging would simply
pull the damaged section of the hull apart, so we hoisted the
storm jib and headed for where I thought the two islands were.
Mary found some corned beef and cracker biscuits, and we ate
our first meal in almost two days.
But our respite was short-lived. At 4 p.m. black clouds began
building up behind us; within the hour the wind was back to 40
knots and the seas were getting higher. The weather continued
to deteriorate throughout the night, and by dawn on January 5,
our situation was again desperate.
When I went in to comfort the children, Jon asked, “Daddy,
are we going to die?” I tried to assure him that we could make it.
“But, Daddy,” he went on, “we aren’t afraid of dying if we can all
be together — you and Mummy, Sue and I.”
I could find no words with which to respond, but I left the
children’s cabin determined to fight the sea with everything I
had. To protect the weakened starboard side, I decided to heaveto
— with the undamaged port hull facing the oncoming waves,
using an improvised sea anchor of heavy nylon rope and two 22
litre plastic barrels of paraffin.
That evening, Mary and I sat together holding hands, as the
motion of the ship brought more and more water in through the
broken planks. We both felt the end was very near.
But Wavewalker rode out the storm and by the morning of
January 6, with the wind easing, I tried to get a reading on the
sextant. Back in the chartroom, I worked on wind speeds,
changes of course, drift and current in an effort to calculate our
position. The best I could determine was that we were somewhere
in 150,000 kilometres of ocean looking for a 65 kilometre-wide
island.
While I was thinking, Sue, moving painfully, joined me. The
left side of her head was now very swollen and her blackened
eyes narrowed to slits. She gave me a card she had made.
On the front she had drawn caricatures of Mary and me
with the words: “Here are some funny people. Did they make
you laugh? I laughed a lot as well.” Inside was a message: “Oh,
how I love you both. So this card is to say thank you and let’s
hope for the best.” Somehow we had to make it.
I checked and rechecked my calculations. We had lost our main
compass and I was using a spare which had not been corrected
for magnetic variation. I made an allowance for this and another
estimate of the influence of the westerly currents which flow
through this part of the Indian Ocean.
About 2 p.m., I went on deck and asked Larry to steer a
course of 185 degrees. If we were lucky, I told him with a
conviction I did not feel, he could expect to see the island at
about 5 p.m.
Then with a heavy heart, I went below, climbed on my bunk
and amazingly, dozed off. When I woke it was 6 p.m., and growing
dark. I knew we must have missed the island, and with the sail
we had left, we couldn’t hope to beat back into the westerly winds.
At that moment, a tousled head appeared by my bunk. “Can I
have a hug?” Jonathan asked. Sue was right behind him.
“Why am I getting a hug now?” I asked.
“Because you are the best daddy in the whole world — and
the best captain,” my son replied.
“Not today, Jon, I’m afraid.”
“Why, you must be,” said Sue in a matter-of-fact voice. “You
found the island.”
“What!” I shouted.
“It’s out there in front of us,” they chorused, “as big as a
battleship.”
I rushed on deck and gazed with relief at the stark outline of
Ile Amsterdam. It was only a bleak piece of volcanic rock, with
little vegetation — the most beautiful island in the world!
We anchored offshore for the night, and the next morning all
28 inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore.
With land under my feet again, my thoughts were full of
Larry and Herbie, cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress,
and of Mary, who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours.
Most of all, I thought of a seven-year-old girl, who did not want
us to worry about a head injury (which subsequently took six
minor operations to remove a recurring blood clot between skin
and skull), and of a six-year-old boy who was not afraid to die.;

We anchored offshore for the night, and the next morning all
28 inhabitants of the island cheered as they helped us ashore.
With land under my feet again, my thoughts were full of
Larry and Herbie, cheerful and optimistic under the direst stress,
and of Mary, who stayed at the wheel for all those crucial hours.
Most of all, I thought of a seven-year-old girl, who did not want
us to worry about a head injury (which subsequently took six
minor operations to remove a recurring blood clot between skin
and skull), and of a six-year-old boy who was not afraid to die.;

Discovering Tut: the Saga Continues
He was just a teenager when he
died. The last heir of a powerful
family that had ruled Egypt and its
empire for centuries, he was laid to
rest laden with gold and eventually
forgotten. Since the discovery of his
tomb in 1922, the modern world
has speculated about what
happened to him, with murder being
the most extreme possibility. Now,
leaving his tomb for the first time
in almost 80 years, Tut has
undergone a CT scan that offers
new clues about his life and death —
and provides precise data for an
accurate forensic reconstruction
of the boyish pharaoh
AN angry wind stirred up ghostly dust devils as King Tut was taken
from his resting place in the ancient Egyptian cemetery known as
the Valley of the Kings*. Dark-bellied clouds had scudded across
the desert sky all day and now were veiling the stars in casket
grey. It was 6 p.m. on 5 January 2005. The world’s most famous
mummy glided head first into a CT scanner brought here to probe
the lingering medical mysteries of this little understood young ruler
who died more than 3,300 years ago.
All afternoon the usual line of tourists from around the world
had descended into the cramped, rock-cut tomb some 26 feet
underground to pay their respects. They gazed at the murals on the
walls of the burial chamber and peered at Tut’s gilded face, the most
striking feature of his mummy-shaped outer coffin lid. Some visitors
read from guidebooks in a whisper. Others stood silently, perhaps
pondering Tut’s untimely death in his late teens, or wondering with
a shiver if the pharaoh’s curse — death or misfortune falling upon
those who disturbed him — was really true.
“The mummy is in very bad condition because of what Carter
did in the 1920s,” said Zahi Hawass, Secretary General of Egypt’s
Supreme Council of Antiquities, as he leaned over the body for a
long first look. Carter—Howard Carter, that is — was the British
archaeologist who in 1922 discovered Tut’s tomb after years of
futile searching. Its contents, though hastily ransacked in antiquity,
were surprisingly complete. They remain the richest royal collection
ever found and have become part of the pharaoh’s legend. Stunning
artefacts in gold, their eternal brilliance meant to guarantee
resurrection, caused a sensation at the time of the discovery —
and still get the most attention. But Tut was also buried with
everyday things he’d want in the afterlife: board games, a bronze
razor, linen undergarments, cases of food and wine.
After months of carefully recording the pharaoh’s funerary
treasures, Carter began investigating his three nested coffins.
Opening the first, he found a shroud adorned with garlands of
willow and olive leaves, wild celery, lotus petals, and cornflowers,
the faded evidence of a burial in March or April. When he finally
reached the mummy, though, he ran into trouble. The ritual resins
had hardened, cementing Tut to the bottom of his solid gold coffin.
“No amount of legitimate force could move them,” Carter wrote
later. “What was to be done?”
The sun can beat down like a hammer this far south in Egypt,
and Carter tried to use it to loosen the resins. For several hours
he set the mummy outside in blazing sunshine that heated it to
149 degrees Fahrenheit. Nothing budged. He reported with
scientific detachment that “the consolidated material had to be
chiselled away from beneath the limbs and trunk before it was
possible to raise the king’s remains.”
In his defence, Carter really had little choice. If he hadn’t cut
the mummy free, thieves most certainly would have
circumvented the guards and ripped it apart to remove the gold.
In Tut’s time the royals were fabulously wealthy, and they
thought — or hoped — they could take their riches with them.
For his journey to the great beyond, King Tut was lavished with
glittering goods: precious collars, inlaid necklaces and bracelets,
rings, amulets, a ceremonial apron, sandals, sheaths for his fingers
and toes, and the now iconic inner coffin and mask — all of pure
gold. To separate Tut from his adornments, Carter’s men removed
the mummy’s head and severed nearly every major joint. Once
they had finished, they reassembled the remains on a layer of
sand in a wooden box with padding that concealed the damage,
the bed where Tut now rests.
Archaeology has changed substantially in the intervening
decades, focusing less on treasure and more on the fascinating
details of life and intriguing mysteries of death. It also uses more
sophisticated tools, including medical technology. In 1968, more
than 40 years after Carter’s discovery, an anatomy professor
X-rayed the mummy and revealed a startling fact: beneath the resin
that cakes his chest, his breast-bone and front ribs are missing.
Today diagnostic imaging can be done with computed
tomography, or CT, by which hundreds of X-rays in cross section
are put together like slices of bread to create a three-dimensional
virtual body. What more would a CT scan reveal of Tut than the
X-ray? And could it answer two of the biggest questions still
lingering about him — how did he die, and how old was he at the
time of his death?
King Tut’s demise was a big event, even by royal standards.
He was the last of his family’s line, and his funeral was the death
rattle of a dynasty. But the particulars of his passing away and its
aftermath are unclear.
Amenhotep III — Tut’s father or grandfather — was a powerful
pharaoh who ruled for almost four decades at the height of the
eighteenth dynasty’s golden age. His son Amenhotep IV succeeded
him and initiated one of the strangest periods in the history of
ancient Egypt. The new pharaoh promoted the worship of the
Aten, the sun disk, changed his name to Akhenaten, or ‘servant
of the Aten,’ and moved the religious capital from the old city of
Thebes to the new city of Akhetaten, known now as Amarna. He
further shocked the country by attacking Amun, a major god,
smashing his images and closing his temples. “It must have been
a horrific time,” said Ray Johnson, director of the University of
Chicago’s research centre in Luxor, the site of ancient Thebes.
“The family that had ruled for centuries was coming to an end,
and then Akhenaten went a little wacky.”
After Akhenaten’s death, a mysterious ruler named
Smenkhkare appeared briefly and exited with hardly a trace.
And then a very young Tutankhaten took the throne — King
Tut as he’s widely known today. The boy king soon changed his
name to Tutankhamun, ‘living image of Amun,’ and oversaw a
restoration of the old ways. He reigned for about nine years —
and then died unexpectedly.
Regardless of his fame and the speculations about his fate, Tut is
one mummy among many in Egypt. How many? No one knows. The
Egyptian Mummy Project, which began an inventory in late 2003,
has recorded almost 600 so far and is still counting. The next phase:
scanning the mummies with a portable CT machine donated by the
National Geographic Society and Siemens, its manufacturer. King Tut
is one of the first mummies to be scanned — in death, as in life, moving
regally ahead of his countrymen.
A CT machine scanned the mummy head to toe, creating
1,700 digital X-ray images in cross section. Tut’s head, scanned
in 0.62 millimetre slices to register its intricate structures, takes
on eerie detail in the resulting image. With Tut’s entire body
similarly recorded, a team of specialists in radiology, forensics,
and anatomy began to probe the secrets that the winged goddesses
of a gilded burial shrine protected for so long.
The night of the scan, workmen carried Tut from the tomb in
his box. Like pallbearers they climbed a ramp and a flight of
stairs into the swirling sand outside, then rose on a hydraulic
lift into the trailer that held the scanner. Twenty minutes later
two men emerged, sprinted for an office nearby, and returned
with a pair of white plastic fans. The million-dollar scanner had
quit because of sand in a cooler fan. “Curse of the pharaoh,”
joked a guard nervously.Eventually the substitute fans worked well enough to finish
the procedure. After checking that no data had been lost, the
technicians turned Tut over to the workmen, who carried him
back to his tomb. Less than three hours after he was removed
from his coffin, the pharaoh again rested in peace where the
funerary priests had laid him so long ago.
Back in the trailer a technician pulled up astonishing images
of Tut on a computer screen. A grey head took shape from a
scattering of pixels, and the technician spun and tilted it in every
direction. Neck vertebrae appeared as clearly as in an anatomy
class. Other images revealed a hand, several views of the rib cage,
and a transection of the skull. But for now the pressure was off.
Sitting back in his chair, Zahi Hawass smiled, visibly relieved
that nothing had gone seriously wrong. “I didn’t sleep last night,
not for a second,” he said. “I was so worried. But now I think I
will go and sleep.”
By the time we left the trailer, descending metal stairs to the
sandy ground, the wind had stopped. The winter air lay cold and
still, like death itself, in this valley of the departed. Just above the
entrance to Tut’s tomb stood Orion — the constellation that the
ancient Egyptians knew as the soul of Osiris, the god of the
afterlife — watching over the boy king.
-(Source: National Geographic, Vol 207, No. 6);

The Laburnum Top
The Laburnum top is silent, quite still
In the afternoon yellow September sunlight,
A few leaves yellowing, all its seeds fallen.
Till the goldfinch comes, with a twitching chirrup
A suddenness, a startlement, at a branch end.
Then sleek as a lizard, and alert, and abrupt,
She enters the thickness, and a machine starts up
Of chitterings, and a tremor of wings, and trillings —
The whole tree trembles and thrills.
It is the engine of her family.
She stokes it full, then flirts out to a branch-end
Showing her barred face identity mask
Then with eerie delicate whistle-chirrup whisperings
She launches away, towards the infinite
And the laburnum subsides to empty.

Glossary:
laburnum: a short tree with hanging branches, yellow
flowers and poisonous seeds
goldfinch: a small singing bird with yellow feathers on
its wings;


The Ailing Planet: the Green Movement’s Role

ONE cannot recall any movement in world history which has
gripped the imagination of the entire human race so completely
and so rapidly as the Green Movement which started nearly
twenty-five years ago. In 1972 the world’s first nationwide Green
party was founded in New Zealand. Since then, the movement
has not looked back.
We have shifted — one hopes, irrevocably — from the
mechanistic view to a holistic and ecological view of the world.
It is a shift in human perceptions as revolutionary as that
introduced by Copernicus who taught mankind in the sixteenth
century that the earth and the other planets revolved round the
sun. For the first time in human history, there is a growing
worldwide consciousness that the earth itself is a living
organism — an enormous being of which we are parts. It has its
own metabolic needs and vital processes which need to be
respected and preserved.
The earth’s vital signs reveal a patient in declining health.
We have begun to realise our ethical obligations to be good
stewards of the planet and responsible trustees of the legacy to
future generations.
The concept of sustainable development was popularised
in 1987 by the World Commission on Environment and
Development. In its report it defined the idea as “Development
that meets the needs of the present, without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their needs”, i.e., without
stripping the natural world of resources future generations
would need.
In the zoo at Lusaka, Zambia, there is a cage where the notice
reads, ‘The world’s most dangerous animal’. Inside the cage there
is no animal but a mirror where you see yourself. Thanks to the
efforts of a number of agencies in different countries, a new
awareness has now dawned upon the most dangerous animal in
the world. He has realised the wisdom of shifting from a system
based on domination to one based on partnership.
Scientists have catalogued about 1.4 million living species
with which mankind shares the earth. Estimates vary widely as
regards the still-uncatalogued living species — biologists reckon
that about three to a hundred million other living species still
languish unnamed in ignominious darkness.
One of the early international commissions which dealt, inter
alia, with the question of ecology and environment was the Brandt
Commission which had a distinguished Indian as one of its
members — Mr L.K. Jha. The First Brandt Report raised the
question — “Are we to leave our successors a scorched planet of
advancing deserts, impoverished landscapes and ailing
environment?”
Mr Lester R. Brown in his thoughtful book, The Global
Economic Prospect, points out that the earth’s principal
biological systems are four — fisheries, forests, grasslands, and
croplands — and they form the foundation of the global
economic system. In addition to supplying our food, these four
systems provide virtually all the raw materials for industry
except minerals and petroleum-derived synthetics. In large
areas of the world, human claims on these systems are reaching
an unsustainable level, a point where their productivity is being
impaired. When this happens, fisheries collapse, forests
disappear, grasslands are converted into barren wastelands,
and croplands deteriorate. In a protein-conscious and proteinhungry
world, over-fishing is common every day. In poor
countries, local forests are being decimated in order to procure
firewood for cooking. In some places, firewood has become so
expensive that “what goes under the pot now costs more than
what goes inside it”. Since the tropical forest is, in the words of
Dr Myers, “the powerhouse of evolution”, several species of life
face extinction as a result of its destruction.
It has been well said that forests precede mankind; deserts
follow. The world’s ancient patrimony of tropical forests is now
eroding at the rate of forty to fifty million acres a year, and the
growing use of dung for burning deprives the soil of an important
natural fertiliser. The World Bank estimates that a five-fold increase
in the rate of forest planting is needed to cope with the expected
fuelwood demand in the year 2000.
James Speth, the President of the World Resources
Institute, said the other day, “We were saying that we are losing
the forests at an acre a second, but it is much closer to an
acre-and-a-half to a second”.
Article 48A of the Constitution of India provides that “the
State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country”. But what
causes endless anguish is the fact that laws are never respected
nor enforced in India. (For instance, the Constitution says that
casteism, untouchability and bonded labour shall be abolished,
but they flourish shamelessly even after forty-four years of the
operation of the Constitution.) A recent report of our Parliament’s
Estimates Committee has highlighted the near catastrophic
depletion of India’s forests over the last four decades. India,
according to reliable data, is losing its forests at the rate of 3.7
million acres a year. Large areas, officially designated as forest
land, “are already virtually treeless”. The actual loss of forests is
estimated to be about eight times the rate indicated by
government statistics.
A three-year study using satellites and aerial photography
conducted by the United Nations, warns that the environment
has deteriorated so badly that it is ‘critical’ in many of the eightyeight
countries investigated.
There can be no doubt that the growth of world population
is one of the strongest factors distorting the future of human
society. It took mankind more than a million years to reach the
first billion. That was the world population around the year 1800.
By the year 1900, a second billion was added, and the twentieth
century has added another 3.7 billion. The present world
population is estimated at 5.7 billion. Every four days the world
population increases by one million.
Fertility falls as incomes rise, education spreads, and health
improves. Thus development is the best contraceptive. But
development itself may not be possible if the present increase in
numbers continues.
The rich get richer, and the poor beget children which
condemns them to remain poor. More children does not mean
more workers, merely more people without work. It is not
suggested that human beings be treated like cattle and
compulsorily sterilised. But there is no alternative to voluntary
family planning without introducing an element of coercion.
The choice is really between control of population and
perpetuation of poverty.
The population of India is estimated to be 920 million
today — more than the entire populations of Africa and South
America put together. No one familiar with the conditions in
India would doubt that the hope of the people would die in
their hungry hutments unless population control is given
topmost priority.
For the first time in human history we see a transcending
concern — the survival not just of the people but of the planet.
We have begun to take a holistic view of the very basis of our
existence. The environmental problem does not necessarily signal
our demise, it is our passport for the future. The emerging new
world vision has ushered in the Era of Responsibility. It is a holistic
view, an ecological view, seeing the world as an integrated whole
rather than a dissociated collection of parts.
Industry has a most crucial role to play in this new Era of
Responsibility. What a transformation would be effected if more
businessmen shared the view of the Chairman of Du Pont,
Mr Edgar S. Woolard who, five years ago, declared himself to be
the Company’s “Chief Environmental Officer”. He said, “Our
continued existence as a leading manufacturer requires that we
excel in environmental performance.”
Of all the statements made by Margaret Thatcher during the
years of her Prime Ministership, none has passed so decisively
into the current coin of English usage as her felicitous words: “No
generation has a freehold on this earth. All we have is a life tenancy
— with a full repairing lease”. In the words of Mr Lester Brown,
“We have not inherited this earth from our forefathers; we have
borrowed it from our children.”;

Childhood
When did my childhood go?
Was it the day I ceased to be eleven,
Was it the time I realised that Hell and Heaven,
Could not be found in Geography,
And therefore could not be,
Was that the day!
When did my childhood go?
Was it the time I realised that adults were not
all they seemed to be,
They talked of love and preached of love,
But did not act so lovingly,
Was that the day!
When did my childhood go?
Was it when I found my mind was really mine,
To use whichever way I choose,
Producing thoughts that were not those of other people
But my own, and mine alone
Was that the day!
Where did my childhood go?
It went to some forgotten place,
That’s hidden in an infant’s face,
That’s all I know.;

The Adventure

THE Jijamata Express sped along the Pune-Bombay* route
considerably faster than the Deccan Queen. There were no
industrial townships outside Pune. The first stop, Lonavala, came
in 40 minutes. The ghat section that followed was no different
from what he knew. The train stopped at Karjat only briefly and
went on at even greater speed. It roared through Kalyan.
Meanwhile, the racing mind of Professor Gaitonde had arrived
at a plan of action in Bombay. Indeed, as a historian he felt he
should have thought of it sooner. He would go to a big library
and browse through history books. That was the surest way of
finding out how the present state of affairs was reached. He also
planned eventually to return to Pune and have a long talk with
Rajendra Deshpande, who would surely help him understand
what had happened.
That is, assuming that in this world there existed someone
called Rajendra Deshpande!
The train stopped beyond the long tunnel. It was a small station
called Sarhad. An Anglo-Indian in uniform went through the train
checking permits.
“This is where the British Raj begins. You are going for the
first time, I presume?” Khan Sahib asked.
“Yes.” The reply was factually correct. Gangadharpant had
not been to this Bombay before. He ventured a question: “And,
Khan Sahib, how will you go to Peshawar?”
“This train goes to the Victoria Terminus*. I will take the
Frontier Mail tonight out of Central.”
“How far does it go? By what route?”
“Bombay to Delhi, then to Lahore and then Peshawar. A long
journey. I will reach Peshawar the day after tomorrow.”
Thereafter, Khan Sahib spoke a lot about his business and
Gangadharpant was a willing listener. For, in that way, he was
able to get some flavour of life in this India that was so different.
The train now passed through the suburban rail traffic. The
blue carriages carried the letters, GBMR, on the side.
“Greater Bombay Metropolitan Railway,” explained Khan
Sahib. “See the tiny Union Jack painted on each carriage? A
gentle reminder that we are in British territory.”
The train began to slow down beyond Dadar and stopped
only at its destination, Victoria Terminus. The station looked
remarkably neat and clean. The staff was mostly made up of
Anglo-Indians and Parsees along with a handful of British officers.
As he emerged from the station, Gangadharpant found
himself facing an imposing building. The letters on it proclaimed
its identity to those who did not know this Bombay landmark:
EAST INDIA HOUSE HEADQUARTERS OF
THE EAST INDIA COMPANY
Prepared as he was for many shocks, Professor Gaitonde had not
expected this. The East India Company had been wound up shortly
after the events of 1857 — at least, that is what history books said.
Yet, here it was, not only alive but flourishing. So, history had
taken a different turn, perhaps before 1857. How and when had it
happened? He had to find out.
As he walked along Hornby Road, as it was called, he found
a different set of shops and office buildings. There was no
Handloom House building. Instead, there were Boots and
Woolworth departmental stores, imposing offices of Lloyds,
Barclays and other British banks, as in a typical high street of a
town in England.
He turned right along Home Street and entered Forbes
building.
“I wish to meet Mr Vinay Gaitonde, please,” he said to the
English receptionist.
She searched through the telephone list, the staff list and
then through the directory of employees of all the branches of
the firm. She shook her head and said, “I am afraid I can’t find
anyone of that name either here or in any of our branches. Are
you sure he works here?”
This was a blow, not totally unexpected. If he himself were
dead in this world, what guarantee had he that his son would
be alive? Indeed, he may not even have been born!
He thanked the girl politely and came out. It was
characteristic of him not to worry about where he would stay.
His main concern was to make his way to the library of the
Asiatic Society to solve the riddle of history. Grabbing a quick
lunch at a restaurant, he made his way to the Town Hall.
Yes, to his relief, the Town Hall was there, and it did house the
library. He entered the reading room and asked for a list of history
books including his own.
His five volumes duly arrived on his table. He started from
the beginning. Volume one took the history up to the period of
Ashoka, volume two up to Samudragupta, volume three up to
Mohammad Ghori and volume four up to the death of Aurangzeb.
Up to this period history was as he knew it. The change evidently
had occurred in the last volume.
Reading volume five from both ends inwards, Gangadharpant
finally converged on the precise moment where history had taken
a different turn.
That page in the book described the Battle of Panipat, and it
mentioned that the Marathas won it handsomely. Abdali was
routed and he was chased back to Kabul by the triumphant
Maratha army led by Sadashivrao Bhau and his nephew, the
young Vishwasrao.
The book did not go into a blow-by-blow account of the
battle itself. Rather, it elaborated in detail its consequences for
the power struggle in India. Gangadharpant read through the
account avidly. The style of writing was unmistakably his, yet
he was reading the account for the first time!
Their victory in the battle was not only a great morale booster
to the Marathas but it also established their supremacy in
northern India. The East India Company, which had been
watching these developments from the sidelines, got the message
and temporarily shelved its expansionist programme.
For the Peshwas the immediate result was an increase in
the influence of Bhausaheb and Vishwasrao who eventfully
succeeded his father in 1780 A.D. The trouble-maker,
Dadasaheb, was relegated to the background and he eventually
retired from state politics.
To its dismay, the East India Company met its match in
the new Maratha ruler, Vishwasrao. He and his brother,
Madhavrao, combined political acumen with valour and
systematically expanded their influence all over India. The
Company was reduced to pockets of influence near Bombay,
Calcutta* and Madras@, just like its European rivals, the
Portuguese and the French.
For political reasons, the Peshwas kept the puppet Mughal
regime alive in Delhi. In the nineteenth century these de facto
rulers from Pune were astute enough to recognise the
importance of the technological age dawning in Europe. They
set up their own centres for science and technology. Here, the
East India Company saw another opportunity to extend its
influence. It offered aid and experts. They were accepted only to
make the local centres self-sufficient.
The twentieth century brought about further changes
inspired by the West. India moved towards a democracy. By
then, the Peshwas had lost their enterprise and they were
gradually replaced by democratically elected bodies. The
Sultanate at Delhi survived even this transition, largely because
it wielded no real influence. The Shahenshah of Delhi was no
more than a figurehead to rubber-stamp the ‘recommendations’
made by the central parliament.
As he read on, Gangadharpant began to appreciate the India
he had seen. It was a country that had not been subjected to
slavery for the white man; it had learnt to stand on its feet and
knew what self-respect was. From a position of strength and for
purely commercial reasons, it had allowed the British to retain
Bombay as the sole outpost on the subcontinent. That lease was
to expire in the year 2001, according to a treaty of 1908.
Gangadharpant could not help comparing the country he
knew with what he was witnessing around him.
But, at the same time, he felt that his investigations were
incomplete. How did the Marathas win the battle? To find the
answer he must look for accounts of the battle itself.
He went through the books and journals before him. At last,
among the books he found one that gave him the clue. It was
Bhausahebanchi Bakhar.
Although he seldom relied on the Bakhars for historical
evidence, he found them entertaining to read. Sometimes, buried
in the graphic but doctored accounts, he could spot the germ
of truth. He found one now in a three-line account of how close
Vishwasrao had come to being killed:
... And then Vishwasrao guided his horse to the melee where the
elite troops were fighting and he attacked them. And God was
merciful. A shot brushed past his ear. Even the difference of a til
(sesame) would have led to his death.
At eight o’clock the librarian politely reminded the professor
that the library was closing for the day. Gangadharpant emerged
from his thoughts. Looking around he noticed that he was the
only reader left in that magnificent hall.
“I beg your pardon, sir! May I request you to keep these
books here for my use tomorrow morning? By the way, when do
you open?”
“At eight o’clock, sir.” The librarian smiled. Here was a user
and researcher right after his heart.
As the professor left the table he shoved some notes into his
right pocket. Absent-mindedly, he also shoved the Bakhar into his left pocket.
He found a guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He
then set out for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
In the maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal.
So, a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor
Gaitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress,
although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde
was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform
He found a guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He
then set out for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
In the maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal.
So, a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor
Gaitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress,
although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde
was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform
He found a guest house to stay in and had a frugal meal. He
then set out for a stroll towards the Azad Maidan.
In the maidan he found a throng moving towards a pandal.
So, a lecture was to take place. Force of habit took Professor
Gaitonde towards the pandal. The lecture was in progress,
although people kept coming and going. But Professor Gaitonde
was not looking at the audience. He was staring at the platform
as if mesmerised. There was a table and a chair but the latter was
unoccupied.
The presidential chair unoccupied! The sight stirred him to
the depths. Like a piece of iron attracted to a magnet, he swiftly
moved towards the chair.
The speaker stopped in mid-sentence, too shocked to
continue. But the audience soon found voice.
“Vacate the chair!”
“This lecture series has no chairperson...”
“Away from the platform, mister!”
“The chair is symbolic, don’t you know?”
What nonsense! Whoever heard of a public lecture without a
presiding dignitary? Professor Gaitonde went to the mike and
gave vent to his views. “Ladies and gentlemen, an unchaired
lecture is like Shakespeare’s Hamlet without the Prince of
Denmark. Let me tell you...”
But the audience was in no mood to listen. “Tell us nothing.
We are sick of remarks from the chair, of vote of thanks, of long
introductions.”
“We only want to listen to the speaker...”
“We abolished the old customs long ago...”
“Keep the platform empty, please...”
But Gangadharpant had the experience of speaking at 999
meetings and had faced the Pune audience at its most hostile.
He kept on talking.
He soon became a target for a shower of tomatoes, eggs and
other objects. But he kept on trying valiantly to correct this
sacrilege. Finally, the audience swarmed to the stage to eject
him bodily.
And, in the crowd Gangadharpant was nowhere to be seen.
“That is all I have to tell, Rajendra. All I know is that I was found
in the Azad Maidan in the morning. But I was back in the world
I am familiar with. Now, where exactly did I spend those two
days when I was absent from here?”
Rajendra was dumbfounded by the narrative. It took him a
while to reply.
“Professor, before, just prior to your collision with the truck,
what were you doing?” Rajendra asked.
“I was thinking of the catastrophe theory and its implications
for history.”
“Right! I thought so!” Rajendra smiled.
“Don’t smile smugly. In case you think that it was just my
mind playing tricks and my imagination running amok, look
at this.”
And, triumphantly, Professor Gaitonde produced his vital
piece of evidence: a page torn out of a book.
Rajendra read the text on the printed page and his face
underwent a change. Gone was the smile and in its place came
a grave expression. He was visibly moved.
Gangadharpant pressed home his advantage. “I had
inadvertently slipped the Bakhar in my pocket as I left the library.
I discovered my error when I was paying for my meal. I had
intended to return it the next morning. But it seems that in the
melee of Azad Maidan, the book was lost; only this torn-off page
remained. And, luckily for me, the page contains vital evidence.”
Rajendra again read the page. It described how Vishwasrao
narrowly missed the bullet; and how that event, taken as an
omen by the Maratha army, turned the tide in their favour.
“Now look at this.” Gangadharpant produced his own copy
of Bhausahebanchi Bakhar, opened at the relevant page. The
account ran thus:
... And then Vishwasrao guided his horse to the melee where the
elite troops were fighting, and he attacked them. And God expressed
His displeasure. He was hit by the bullet.
“Professor Gaitonde, you have given me food for thought.
Until I saw this material evidence, I had simply put your
experience down to fantasy. But facts can be stranger than
fantasies, as I am beginning to realise.”
“Facts? What are the facts? I am dying to know!” Professor
Gaitonde said.
Rajendra motioned him to silence and started pacing the room,
obviously under great mental strain. Finally, he turned around
and said, “Professor Gaitonde, I will try to rationalise your
experience on the basis of two scientific theories as known today.
Whether I succeed or not in convincing you of the facts, only
you can judge — for you have indeed passed through a fantastic
experience: or, more correctly, a catastrophic experience!”
“Please continue, Rajendra! I am all ears,” Professor Gaitonde
replied. Rajendra continued pacing as he talked.
“You have heard a lot about the catastrophe theory at that
seminar. Let us apply it to the Battle of Panipat. Wars fought
face to face on open grounds offer excellent examples of this
theory. The Maratha army was facing Abdali’s troops on the
field of Panipat. There was no great disparity between the latter’s
troops and the opposing forces. Their armour was comparable.
So, a lot depended on the leadership and the morale of the troops.
The juncture at which Vishwasrao, the son of and heir to the
Peshwa, was killed proved to be the turning point. As history
has it, his uncle, Bhausaheb, rushed into the melee and was
never seen again. Whether he was killed in battle or survived is
not known. But for the troops at that particular moment, that
blow of losing their leaders was crucial. They lost their morale
and fighting spirit. There followed an utter rout.
“Exactly, Professor! And what you have shown me on that
torn page is the course taken by the battle, when the bullet
missed Vishwasrao. A crucial event gone the other way. And its
effect on the troops was also the opposite. It boosted their morale
and provided just that extra impetus that made all the
difference,” Rajendra said.
“Maybe so. Similar statements are made about the Battle of
Waterloo, which Napoleon could have won. But we live in a
unique world which has a unique history. This idea of ‘it might
have been’ is okay for the sake of speculation but not for reality,”
Gangadharpant said.
“I take issue with you there. In fact, that brings me to my
second point which you may find strange; but please hear me
out,” Rajendra said.
Gangadharpant listened expectantly as Rajendra continued.
“What do we mean by reality? We experience it directly with our
senses or indirectly via instruments. But is it limited to what we
see? Does it have other manifestations?
“That reality may not be unique has been found from
experiments on very small systems— of atoms and their
constituent particles. When dealing with such systems the
physicist discovered something startling. The behaviour of these
systems cannot be predicted definitively even if all the physical
laws governing those systems are known.
“Take an example. I fire an electron from a source. Where will
it go? If I fire a bullet from a gun in a given direction at a given
speed, I know where it will be at a later time. But I cannot make
such an assertion for the electron. It may be here, there, anywhere.
I can at best quote odds for it being found in a specified location
at a specified time.”
“The lack of determinism in quantum theory! Even an
ignoramus historian like me has heard of it,” Professor
Gaitonde said.
“So, imagine many world pictures. In one world the electron
is found here, in another it is over there. In yet another it is in a
still different location. Once the observer finds where it is, we
know which world we are talking about. But all those alternative
worlds could exist just the same.” Rajendra paused to marshall
his thoughts.
“But is there any contact between those many worlds?”
Professor Gaitonde asked.
“Yes and no! Imagine two worlds, for example. In both an
electron is orbiting the nucleus of an atom...”
“Like planets around the sun...” Gangadharpant interjected.
“Not quite. We know the precise trajectory of the planet. The
electron could be orbiting in any of a large number of specified
states. These states may be used to identify the world. In state
no.1 we have the electron in a state of higher energy. In state
no. 2 it is in a state of lower energy. It can make a jump from
high to low energy and send out a pulse of radiation. Or a pulse
of radiation can knock it out of state no. 2 into state no.1. Such
transitions are common in microscopic systems. What if it
happened on a macroscopic level?” Rajendra said.
“I get you! You are suggesting that I made a transition from
one world to another and back again?” Gangadharpant asked.
“Fantastic though it seems, this is the only explanation I
can offer. My theory is that catastrophic situations offer radically
different alternatives for the world to proceed. It seems that so
far as reality is concerned all alternatives are viable but the
observer can experience only one of them at a time.
“By making a transition, you were able to experience two worlds
although one at a time. The one you live in now and the one where
you spent two days. One has the history we know, the other a
different history. The separation or bifurcation took place in the
Battle of Panipat. You neither travelled to the past nor to the future.
You were in the present but experiencing a different world. Of course,
by the same token there must be many more different worlds arising
out of bifurcations at different points of time.”
As Rajendra concluded, Gangadharpant asked the question
that was beginning to bother him most. “But why did I make the
transition?”
“If I knew the answer I would solve a great problem.
Unfortunately, there are many unsolved questions in science
and this is one of them. But that does not stop me from guessing.”
Rajendra smiled and proceeded, “You need some interaction to
cause a transition. Perhaps, at the time of the collision you were
thinking about the catastrophe theory and its role in wars. Maybe
you were wondering about the Battle of Panipat. Perhaps, the
neurons in your brain acted as a trigger.”
“A good guess. I was indeed wondering what course history
would have taken if the result of the battle had gone the other
way,” Professor Gaitonde said. “That was going to be the topic of
my thousandth presidential address.”
“Now you are in the happy position of recounting your real
life experience rather than just speculating,” Rajendra laughed.
But Gangadharpant was grave.
“No, Rajendra, my thousandth address was made on the Azad
Maidan when I was so rudely interrupted. No. The Professor
Gaitonde who disappeared while defending his chair on the platform
will now never be seen presiding at another meeting — I have
conveyed my regrets to the organisers of the Panipat seminar.”;

Silk Road

A FLAWLESS half-moon floated in a perfect blue sky on the morning
we said our goodbyes. Extended banks of cloud like long French
loaves glowed pink as the sun emerged to splash the distant
mountain tops with a rose-tinted blush. Now that we were leaving
Ravu, Lhamo said she wanted to give me a farewell present.
One evening I’d told her through Daniel that I was heading towards
Mount Kailash to complete the kora, and she’d said that I ought
to get some warmer clothes. After ducking back into her tent,
she emerged carrying one of the long-sleeved sheepskin coats
that all the men wore. Tsetan sized me up as we clambered into
his car. “Ah, yes,” he declared, “drokba, sir.”
We took a short cut to get off the Changtang. Tsetan knew a
route that would take us south-west, almost directly towards
Mount Kailash. It involved crossing several fairly high mountain
passes, he said. “But no problem, sir”, he assured us, “if there
is no snow.” What was the likelihood of that I asked. “Not
knowing, sir, until we get there.”
From the gently rolling hills of Ravu, the short cut took us
across vast open plains with nothing in them except a few gazelles
that would look up from nibbling the arid pastures and frown
before bounding away into the void. Further on, where the plains
became more stony than grassy, a great herd of wild ass came
into view. Tsetan told us we were approaching them long before
they appeared. “Kyang,” he said, pointing towards a far-off pall
of dust. When we drew near, I could see the herd galloping en
masse, wheeling and turning in tight formation as if they were
practising manoeuvres on some predetermined course. Plumes
of dust billowed into the crisp, clean air.
As hills started to push up once more from the rocky
wilderness, we passed solitary drokbas tending their flocks.
Sometimes men, sometimes women, these well-wrapped figures
would pause and stare at our car, occasionally waving as we
passed. When the track took us close to their animals, the sheep
would take evasive action, veering away from the speeding vehicle.
We passed nomads’ dark tents pitched in splendid isolation,
usually with a huge black dog, a Tibetan mastiff, standing guard.
These beasts would cock their great big heads when they became
aware of our approach and fix us in their sights. As we continued
to draw closer, they would explode into action, speeding directly
towards us, like a bullet from a gun and nearly as fast.
These shaggy monsters, blacker than the darkest night,
usually wore bright red collars and barked furiously with massive
jaws. They were completely fearless of our vehicle, shooting
straight into our path, causing Tsetan to brake and swerve. The
dog would make chase for a hundred metres or so before easing
off, having seen us off the property. It wasn’t difficult to
understand why ferocious Tibetan mastiffs became popular in
China’s imperial courts as hunting dogs, brought along the Silk
Road in ancient times as tribute from Tibet.
By now we could see snow-capped mountains gathering on
the horizon. We entered a valley where the river was wide and
mostly clogged with ice, brilliant white and glinting in the
sunshine. The trail hugged its bank, twisting with the meanders
as we gradually gained height and the valley sides closed in.
The turns became sharper and the ride bumpier, Tsetan
now in third gear as we continued to climb. The track moved
away from the icy river, labouring through steeper slopes that
sported big rocks daubed with patches of bright orange lichen.
Beneath the rocks, hunks of snow clung on in the nearpermanent
shade. I felt the pressure building up in my ears,
held my nose, snorted and cleared them. We struggled round
another tight bend and Tsetan stopped. He had opened his
door and jumped out of his seat before I realised what was
going on. “Snow,” said Daniel as he too exited the vehicle, letting
in a breath of cold air as he did so.
A swathe of the white stuff lay across the track in front of
us, stretching for maybe fifteen metres before it petered out and
the dirt trail reappeared. The snow continued on either side of
us, smoothing the abrupt bank on the upslope side. The bank
was too steep for our vehicle to scale, so there was no way round
the snow patch. I joined Daniel as Tsetan stepped on to the
encrusted snow and began to slither and slide forward, stamping
his foot from time to time to ascertain how sturdy it was. I looked
at my wristwatch. We were at 5,210 metres above sea level.
The snow didn’t look too deep to me, but the danger wasn’t
its depth, Daniel said, so much as its icy top layer. “If we slip off,
the car could turn over,” he suggested, as we saw Tsetan grab
handfuls of dirt and fling them across the frozen surface. We
both pitched in and, when the snow was spread with soil, Daniel
and I stayed out of the vehicle to lighten Tsetan’s load. He backed
up and drove towards the dirty snow, eased the car on to its icy
surface and slowly drove its length without apparent difficulty.
Ten minutes later, we stopped at another blockage. “Not good,
sir,” Tsetan announced as he jumped out again to survey the
scene. This time he decided to try and drive round the snow.
The slope was steep and studded with major rocks, but somehow
Tsetan negotiated them, his four-wheel drive vehicle lurching
from one obstacle to the next. In so doing he cut off one of the
hairpin bends, regaining the trail further up where the snow
had not drifted.
I checked my watch again as we continued to climb in the
bright sunshine. We crept past 5,400 metres and my head began
to throb horribly. I took gulps from my water bottle, which is
supposed to help a rapid ascent.
We finally reached the top of the pass at 5,515 metres. It was
marked by a large cairn of rocks festooned with white silk scarves
and ragged prayer flags. We all took a turn round the cairn, in a
clockwise direction as is the tradition, and Tsetan checked the
tyres on his vehicle. He stopped at the petrol tank and partially
unscrewed the top, which emitted a loud hiss. The lower
atmospheric pressure was allowing the fuel to expand. It sounded
dangerous to me. “Maybe, sir,” Tsetan laughed “but no smoking.”
My headache soon cleared as we careered down the other
side of the pass. It was two o’clock by the time we stopped for
lunch. We ate hot noodles inside a long canvas tent, part of a
workcamp erected beside a dry salt lake. The plateau is
pockmarked with salt flats and brackish lakes, vestiges of the
Tethys Ocean which bordered Tibet before the great continental
collision that lifted it skyward. This one was a hive of activity,
men with pickaxes and shovels trudging back and forth in their
long sheepskin coats and salt-encrusted boots. All wore
sunglasses against the glare as a steady stream of blue trucks
emerged from the blindingly white lake laden with piles of salt.
By late afternoon we had reached the small town of Hor,
back on the main east-west highway that followed the old trade
route from Lhasa to Kashmir. Daniel, who was returning to
Lhasa, found a ride in a truck so Tsetan and I bade him farewell
outside a tyre-repair shop. We had suffered two punctures in
quick succession on the drive down from the salt lake and Tsetan
was eager to have them fixed since they left him with no spares.
Besides, the second tyre he’d changed had been replaced by
one that was as smooth as my bald head.
Hor was a grim, miserable place. There was no vegetation
whatsoever, just dust and rocks, liberally scattered with years
of accumulated refuse, which was unfortunate given that the
town sat on the shore of Lake Manasarovar, Tibet’s most
venerated stretch of water. Ancient Hindu and Buddhist
cosmology pinpoints Manasarovar as the source of four great
Indian rivers: the Indus, the Ganges, the Sutlej and the
Brahmaputra. Actually only the Sutlej flows from the lake, but
the headwaters of the others all rise nearby on the flanks of
Mount Kailash. We were within striking distance of the great
mountain and I was eager to forge ahead.
But I had to wait. Tsetan told me to go and drink some tea in
Hor’s only cafe which, like all the other buildings in town, was
constructed from badly painted concrete and had three broken
windows. The good view of the lake through one of them helped
to compensate for the draught.
I was served by a Chinese youth in military uniform who
spread the grease around on my table with a filthy rag before
bringing me a glass and a thermos of tea.
Half an hour later, Tsetan relieved me from my solitary
confinement and we drove past a lot more rocks and rubbish
westwards out of town towards Mount Kailash.
My experience in Hor came as a stark contrast to accounts
I’d read of earlier travellers’ first encounters with Lake
Manasarovar. Ekai Kawaguchi, a Japanese monk who had
arrived there in 1900, was so moved by the sanctity of the lake
that he burst into tears. A couple of years later, the hallowed
waters had a similar effect on Sven Hedin, a Swede who wasn’t
prone to sentimental outbursts.
It was dark by the time we finally left again and after
10.30 p.m. we drew up outside a guest house in Darchen for
what turned out to be another troubled night. Kicking around
in the open-air rubbish dump that passed for the town of Hor
had set off my cold once more, though if truth be told it had
never quite disappeared with my herbal tea. One of my nostrils
was blocked again and as I lay down to sleep, I wasn’t convinced
that the other would provide me with sufficient oxygen. My
watch told me I was at 4,760 metres. It wasn’t much higher
than Ravu, and there I’d been gasping for oxygen several times
every night. I’d grown accustomed to these nocturnal
disturbances by now, but they still scared me.
Tired and hungry, I started breathing through my mouth.
After a while, I switched to single-nostril power which seemed
to be admitting enough oxygen but, just as I was drifting off,
I woke up abruptly. Something was wrong. My chest felt
strangely heavy and I sat up, a movement that cleared my nasal
passages almost instantly and relieved the feeling in my chest.
Curious, I thought.
I lay back down and tried again. Same result. I was on the
point of disappearing into the land of nod when something told
me not to. It must have been those emergency electrical
impulses again, but this was not the same as on previous
occasions. This time, I wasn’t gasping for breath, I was simply
not allowed to go to sleep.
Sitting up once more immediately made me feel better. I
could breathe freely and my chest felt fine. But as soon as I lay
down, my sinuses filled and my chest was odd. I tried propping
myself upright against the wall, but now I couldn’t manage to
relax enough to drop off. I couldn’t put my finger on the reason,
but I was afraid to go to sleep. A little voice inside me was
saying that if I did I might never wake up again. So I stayed
awake all night.
Tsetan took me to the Darchen medical college the following
morning. The medical college at Darchen was new and looked
like a monastery from the outside with a very solid door that led
into a large courtyard. We found the consulting room which was
dark and cold and occupied by a Tibetan doctor who wore none
of the paraphernalia that I’d been expecting. No white coat, he
looked like any other Tibetan with a thick pullover and a woolly
hat. When I explained my sleepless symptoms and my sudden
aversion to lying down, he shot me a few questions while feeling
the veins in my wrist.
“It’s a cold,” he said finally through Tsetan. “A cold and the
effects of altitude. I’ll give you something for it.”
I asked him if he thought I’d recover enough to be able to do
the kora. “Oh yes,” he said, “you’ll be fine.”
I walked out of the medical college clutching a brown envelope
stuffed with fifteen screws of paper. I had a five-day course of
Tibetan medicine which I started right away. I opened an afterbreakfast
package and found it contained a brown powder that
I had to take with hot water. It tasted just like cinnamon. The
contents of the lunchtime and bedtime packages were less
obviously identifiable. Both contained small, spherical brown
pellets. They looked suspiciously like sheep dung, but of course
I took them. That night, after my first full day’s course, I slept
very soundly. Like a log, not a dead man.
Once he saw that I was going to live Tsetan left me, to return
to Lhasa. As a Buddhist, he told me, he knew that it didn’t
really matter if I passed away, but he thought it would be bad
for business.
Darchen didn’t look so horrible after a good night’s sleep. It
was still dusty, partially derelict and punctuated by heaps of rubble
and refuse, but the sun shone brilliantly in a clear blue sky and
the outlook across the plain to the south gave me a vision of the
Himalayas, commanded by a huge, snow-capped mountain, Gurla
Mandhata, with just a wisp of cloud suspended over its summit.
The town had a couple of rudimentary general stores selling
Chinese cigarettes, soap and other basic provisions, as well as
the usual strings of prayer flags. In front of one, men gathered
in the afternoon for a game of pool, the battered table looking
supremely incongruous in the open air, while nearby women
washed their long hair in the icy water of a narrow brook that
babbled down past my guest house. Darchen felt relaxed and
unhurried but, for me, it came with a significant drawback. There
were no pilgrims.
I’d been told that at the height of the pilgrimage season, the
town was bustling with visitors. Many brought their own
accommodation, enlarging the settlement round its edges as
they set up their tents which spilled down on to the plain. I’d
timed my arrival for the beginning of the season, but it seemed
I was too early.
One afternoon I sat pondering my options over a glass of tea
in Darchen’s only cafe. After a little consideration, I concluded
they were severely limited. Clearly I hadn’t made much progress
with my self-help programme on positive thinking.
In my defence, it hadn’t been easy with all my sleeping
difficulties, but however I looked at it, I could only wait. The
pilgrimage trail was well-trodden, but I didn’t fancy doing it alone.
The kora was seasonal because parts of the route were liable to
blockage by snow. I had no idea whether or not the snow had
cleared, but I wasn’t encouraged by the chunks of dirty ice that
still clung to the banks of Darchen’s brook. Since Tsetan had
left, I hadn’t come across anyone in Darchen with enough English
to answer even this most basic question.
Until, that is, I met Norbu. The cafe was small, dark and
cavernous, with a long metal stove that ran down the middle.
The walls and ceiling were wreathed in sheets of multi-coloured
plastic, of the striped variety— broad blue, red and white—that is
made into stout, voluminous shopping bags sold all over China,
and in many other countries of Asia as well as Europe. As such,
plastic must rate as one of China’s most successful exports along
the Silk Road today.
The cafe had a single window beside which I’d taken up
position so that I could see the pages of my notebook. I’d also
brought a novel with me to help pass the time.
Norbu saw my book when he came in and asked with a
gesture if he could sit opposite me at my rickety table. “You
English?” he enquired, after he’d ordered tea. I told him I was,
and we struck up a conversation.
I didn’t think he was from those parts because he was wearing
a windcheater and metal-rimmed spectacles of a Western style.
He was Tibetan, he told me, but worked in Beijing at the Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences, in the Institute of Ethnic Literature.
I assumed he was on some sort of fieldwork.
“Yes and no,” he said. “I have come to do the kora.” My heart
jumped. Norbu had been writing academic papers about the
Kailash kora and its importance in various works of Buddhist
literature for many years, he told me, but he had never actually
done it himself.
When the time came for me to tell him what brought me to
Darchen, his eyes lit up. “We could be a team,” he said excitedly.
“Two academics who have escaped from the library.” Perhaps
my positive-thinking strategy was working after all.
My initial relief at meeting Norbu, who was also staying in
the guest house, was tempered by the realisation that he was
almost as ill-equipped as I was for the pilgrimage. He kept telling
me how fat he was and how hard it was going to be. “Very high
up,” he kept reminding me, “so tiresome to walk.” He wasn’t
really a practising Buddhist, it transpired, but he had
enthusiasm and he was, of course, Tibetan.
Although I’d originally envisaged making the trek in the
company of devout believers, on reflection I decided that perhaps
Norbu would turn out to be the ideal companion. He suggested
we hire some yaks to carry our luggage, which I interpreted as a
good sign, and he had no intention of prostrating himself all
round the mountain. “Not possible,” he cried, collapsing across
the table in hysterical laughter. It wasn’t his style, and anyway
his tummy was too big.;

______________________________________________________________________________XI-I

The Last Lesson

I started for school very late that morning and was in great
dread of a scolding, especially because M. Hamel had said
that he would question us on participles, and I did not
know the first word about them. For a moment I thought of
running away and spending the day out of doors. It was so
warm, so bright! The birds were chirping at the edge of the
woods; and in the open field back of the sawmill the
Prussian soldiers were drilling. It was all much more
tempting than the rule for participles, but I had the
strength to resist, and hurried off to school.
When I passed the town hall there was a crowd in
front of the bulletin-board. For the last two years all our
bad news had come from there — the lost battles, the draft,
the orders of the commanding officer — and I thought to
myself, without stopping, “What can be the matter now?”
Then, as I hurried by as fast as I could go, the
blacksmith, Wachter, who was there, with his apprentice,
reading the bulletin, called after me, “Don’t go so fast,
bub; you’ll get to your school in plenty of time!”
I thought he was making fun of me, and reached
M. Hamel’s little garden all out of breath.
Usually, when school began, there was a great bustle,
which could be heard out in the street, the opening and
closing of desks, lessons repeated in unison, very loud, with
our hands over our ears to understand better, and the
teacher’s great ruler rapping on the table. But now it was
all so still! I had counted on the commotion to get to my
desk without being seen; but, of course, that day everything
had to be as quiet as Sunday morning. Through the window
I saw my classmates, already in their places, and M. Hamel
walking up and down with his terrible iron ruler under his
arm. I had to open the door and go in before everybody. You
can imagine how I blushed and how frightened I was.
But nothing happened. M. Hamel saw me and said
very kindly, “Go to your place quickly, little Franz. We were
beginning without you.”
I jumped over the bench and sat down at my desk. Not
till then, when I had got a little over my fright, did I see
that our teacher had on his beautiful green coat, his frilled
shirt, and the little black silk
cap, all embroidered, that he
never wore except on
inspection and prize days.
Besides, the whole school
seemed so strange and
solemn. But the thing that
surprised me most was to
see, on the back benches that
were always empty, the village
people sitting quietly like
ourselves; old Hauser, with
his three-cornered hat, the
former mayor, the former
postmaster, and several others besides. Everybody looked
sad; and Hauser had brought an old primer, thumbed at
the edges, and he held it open on his knees with his great
spectacles lying across the pages.
While I was wondering about it all, M. Hamel mounted
his chair, and, in the same grave and gentle tone which he
had used to me, said, “My children, this is the last lesson
I shall give you. The order has come from Berlin to teach
only German in the schools of Alsace and Lorraine. The
new master comes tomorrow. This is your last French
lesson. I want you to be very attentive.”
What a thunderclap these words were to me!
Oh, the wretches; that was what they had put up at
the town-hall!
My last French lesson! Why, I hardly knew how to
write! I should never learn any more! I must stop there, then!
Oh, how sorry I was for not learning my lessons, for seeking
birds’ eggs, or going sliding on the Saar! My books, that had
seemed such a nuisance a while ago, so heavy to carry, my
grammar, and my history of the saints, were old friends now
that I couldn’t give up. And M. Hamel, too; the idea that he
was going away, that I should never see him again, made me
forget all about his ruler and how cranky he was.
Poor man! It was in honour of this last lesson that he
had put on his fine Sunday clothes, and now I understood
why the old men of the village were sitting there in the
back of the room. It was because they were sorry, too, that
they had not gone to school more. It was their way of
thanking our master for his forty years of faithful service
and of showing their respect for the country that was theirs
no more.
While I was thinking of all this, I heard my name called.
It was my turn to recite. What would I not have given to be
able to say that dreadful rule for the participle all through,
very loud and clear, and without one mistake? But I got
mixed up on the first words and stood there, holding on to
my desk, my heart beating, and not daring to look up.
I heard M. Hamel say to me, “I won’t scold you, little
Franz; you must feel bad enough. See how it is! Every day
we have said to ourselves, ‘Bah! I’ve plenty of time. I’ll
learn it tomorrow.’ And now you see where we’ve come out.
Ah, that’s the great trouble with Alsace; she puts off
learning till tomorrow. Now those fellows out there will
have the right to say to you, ‘How is it; you pretend to be
Frenchmen, and yet you can neither speak nor write your
own language?’ But you are not the worst, poor little Franz.
We’ve all a great deal to reproach ourselves with.”
“Your parents were not anxious enough to have you
learn. They preferred to put you to work on a farm or at
the mills, so as to have a little more money. And I? I’ve
been to blame also. Have I not often
sent you to water my flowers
instead of learning your
lessons? And when I
wanted to go fishing,
did I not just give
you a holiday?”
Then, from one
thing to another,
M. Hamel went on
to talk of the
French language,
saying that it was
the most beautiful
language in the world — the
clearest, the most logical; that
we must guard it among us and
never forget it, because when a
people are enslaved, as long as
they hold fast to their language
it is as if they had the key to their
prison. Then he opened a
grammar and read us our lesson.
I was amazed to see how well I
understood it. All he said seemed
so easy, so easy! I think, too, that
I had never listened so carefully,
and that he had never explained
everything with so much patience.
It seemed almost as if the poor
man wanted to give us all he knew
before going away, and to put it
all into our heads at one stroke.
After the grammar, we had a
lesson in writing. That day M.
Hamel had new copies for us,
written in a beautiful round hand
— France, Alsace, France, Alsace. They looked like little
flags floating everywhere in the school-room, hung from
the rod at the top of our desks. You ought to have seen how
every one set to work, and how quiet it was! The only sound
was the scratching of the pens over the paper. Once some
beetles flew in; but nobody paid any attention to them, not
even the littlest ones, who worked right on tracing their
fish-hooks, as if that was French, too. On the roof the
pigeons cooed very low, and I thought to myself, “Will they
make them sing in German, even the pigeons?”
Whenever I looked up from my writing I saw M. Hamel
sitting motionless in his chair and gazing first at one thing,
then at another, as if he wanted to fix in his mind just how
everything looked in that little school-room. Fancy! For
forty years he had been there in the same place, with his
garden outside the window and his class in front of him,
just like that. Only the desks and benches had been worn
smooth; the walnut-trees in the garden were taller, and
the hopvine that he had planted himself twined about the
windows to the roof. How it must have broken his heart to
leave it all, poor man; to hear his sister moving about in
the room above, packing their trunks! For they must leave
the country next day.
But he had the courage to hear every lesson to the
very last. After the writing, we had a lesson in history,
and then the babies chanted their ba, be bi, bo, bu. Down
there at the back of the room old Hauser had put on his
spectacles and, holding his primer in both hands, spelled
the letters with them. You could see that he, too, was crying;
his voice trembled with emotion, and it was so funny to
hear him that we all wanted to laugh and cry. Ah, how
well I remember it, that last lesson!
All at once the church-clock struck twelve. Then the
Angelus. At the same moment the trumpets of the
Prussians, returning from drill, sounded under our
windows. M. Hamel stood up, very pale, in his chair.
I never saw him look so tall.
“My friends,” said he, “I—I—” But something choked
him. He could not go on.
Then he turned to the blackboard, took a piece of chalk,
and, bearing on with all his
might, he wrote as large as he
could —
“Vive La France!”
Then he stopped and leaned
his head against the wall, and,
without a word, he made a
gesture to us with his hand —
“School is dismissed — you
may go.”;

Lost Spring

‘Sometimes I find a Rupee in the garbage’
“Why do you do this?” I ask Saheb whom I encounter every
morning scrounging for gold in the garbage dumps of my
neighbourhood. Saheb left his home long ago. Set amidst
the green fields of Dhaka, his home is not even a distant
memory. There were many storms that swept away their
fields and homes, his mother tells him. That’s why they
left, looking for gold in the big city where he now lives.
“I have nothing else to do,” he mutters, looking away.
“Go to school,” I say glibly, realising immediately how
hollow the advice must sound.
“There is no school in my neighbourhood. When they
build one, I will go.”
“If I start a school, will you come?” I ask, half-joking.
“Yes,” he says, smiling broadly.
A few days later I see him running up to me. “Is your
school ready?”
“It takes longer to build a school,” I say, embarrassed
at having made a promise that was not meant. But promises
like mine abound in every corner of his bleak world.
After months of knowing him, I ask him his name.
“Saheb-e-Alam,” he announces. He does not know what it
means. If he knew its meaning — lord of the universe —
he would have a hard time believing it. Unaware of what
his name represents, he roams the streets with his friends,
an army of barefoot boys who appear like the morning birds
and disappear at noon. Over the months, I have come to
recognise each of them.
“Why aren’t you wearing chappals?” I ask one.
“My mother did not bring them down from the shelf,”
he answers simply.
“Even if she did he will throw them off,” adds another
who is wearing shoes that do not match. When I comment on
it, he shuffles his feet and says nothing. “I want shoes,” says
a third boy who has never owned a pair all his life. Travelling
across the country I have seen children walking barefoot, in
cities, on village roads. It is not lack of money but a tradition
to stay barefoot, is one explanation. I wonder if this is only
an excuse to explain away a perpetual state of poverty.
I remember a story a man from Udipi once told me. As a
young boy he would go to school past an old temple, where
his father was a priest. He would stop briefly at the temple
and pray for a pair of shoes. Thirty years later I visited his
town and the temple, which was now drowned in an air of

desolation. In the backyard, where lived the new priest, there
were red and white plastic chairs. A young boy dressed in a
grey uniform, wearing socks and shoes, arrived panting and
threw his school bag on a folding bed. Looking at the boy, I
remembered the prayer another boy had made to the goddess
when he had finally got a pair of shoes, “Let me never lose
them.” The goddess had granted his prayer. Young boys like
the son of the priest now wore shoes. But many others like
the ragpickers in my neighbourhood remain shoeless.
My acquaintance with the barefoot ragpickers leads
me to Seemapuri, a place on the periphery of Delhi yet miles
away from it, metaphorically. Those who live here are
squatters who came from Bangladesh back in 1971. Saheb’s
family is among them. Seemapuri was then a wilderness. It
still is, but it is no longer empty. In structures of mud, with
roofs of tin and tarpaulin, devoid of sewage, drainage or
running water, live 10,000 ragpickers. They have lived here
for more than thirty years without an identity, without
permits but with ration cards that get their names on voters’
lists and enable them to buy grain. Food is more important
for survival than an identity. “If at the end of the day we
can feed our families and go to bed without an aching
stomach, we would rather live here than in the fields that
gave us no grain,” say a group of women in tattered saris
when I ask them why they left their beautiful land of green
fields and rivers. Wherever they find food, they pitch their
tents that become transit homes. Children grow up in them,
becoming partners in survival. And survival in Seemapuri
means rag-picking. Through the years, it has acquired the
proportions of a fine art. Garbage to them is gold. It is their
daily bread, a roof over their heads, even if it is a leaking
roof. But for a child it is even more.
“I sometimes find a rupee, even a ten-rupee note,”
Saheb says, his eyes lighting up. When you can find a
silver coin in a heap of garbage, you don’t stop scrounging,
for there is hope of finding more. It seems that for children,
garbage has a meaning different from what it means to
their parents. For the children it is wrapped in wonder, for
the elders it is a means of survival.
One winter morning I see Saheb standing by the fenced
gate of the neighbourhood club, watching two young men
dressed in white, playing tennis. “I like the game,” he
hums, content to watch it standing behind the fence. “I go
inside when no one is around,” he admits.
“The gatekeeper lets me use the swing.”
Saheb too is wearing tennis shoes
that look strange over his discoloured
shirt and shorts. “Someone gave them
to me,” he says in the manner of an
explanation. The fact that they are
discarded shoes of some rich boy,
who perhaps refused to wear
them because of a hole in one
of them, does not bother him.
For one who has walked
barefoot, even shoes with a
hole is a dream come true. But
the game he is watching so
intently is out of his reach.
This morning, Saheb is on
his way to the milk booth. In
his hand is a steel canister.
“I now work in a tea stall down
the road,” he says, pointing in
the distance. “I am paid 800 rupees and all my meals.”
Does he like the job? I ask. His face, I see, has lost the
carefree look. The steel canister seems heavier than the
plastic bag he would carry so lightly over his shoulder.
The bag was his. The canister belongs to the man who
owns the tea shop. Saheb is no longer his own master!
“I want to drive a car”
Mukesh insists on being his own master. “I will be a motor
mechanic,” he announces.
“Do you know anything about cars?” I ask.
“I will learn to drive a car,”
he answers, looking straight into
my eyes. His dream looms like a
mirage amidst the dust of streets
that fill his town Firozabad,
famous for its bangles. Every
other family in Firozabad is
engaged in making bangles. It is
the centre of India’s glass-blowing
industry where families have
spent generations working around furnaces, welding glass,
making bangles for all the women in the land it seems.
Mukesh’s family is among them. None of them know
that it is illegal for children like him to work in the glass
furnaces with high temperatures, in dingy cells without air
and light; that the law, if enforced, could get him and all
those 20,000 children out of the hot furnaces where they
slog their daylight hours, often losing the brightness of their
eyes. Mukesh’s eyes beam as he volunteers to take me home,
which he proudly says is being rebuilt. We walk down
stinking lanes choked with garbage, past homes that remain
hovels with crumbling walls, wobbly doors, no windows,
crowded with families of humans and animals coexisting in
a primeval state. He stops at the door of one such house,
bangs a wobbly iron door with his foot, and pushes it open.
We enter a half-built shack. In one part of it, thatched with
dead grass, is a firewood stove over which sits a large vessel
of sizzling spinach leaves. On the ground, in large aluminium
platters, are more chopped vegetables. A frail young woman
is cooking the evening meal for the whole family. Through
eyes filled with smoke she smiles. She is the wife of Mukesh’s
elder brother. Not much older in years, she has begun to
command respect as the bahu, the daughter-in-law of the
house, already in charge of three men — her husband,
Mukesh and their father. When the older man enters, she
gently withdraws behind the broken wall and brings her
veil closer to her face. As custom demands, daughters-inlaw
must veil their faces before male elders. In this case
the elder is an impoverished bangle maker. Despite long
years of hard labour, first as a tailor, then a bangle maker,
he has failed to renovate a house, send his two sons to
school. All he has managed to do is teach them what he
knows — the art of making bangles.
“It is his karam, his destiny,” says Mukesh’s
grandmother, who has watched her own husband go blind
with the dust from polishing the glass of bangles. “Can a
god-given lineage ever be broken?” she implies. Born in
the caste of bangle makers, they have seen nothing but
bangles — in the house, in the yard, in every other house,
every other yard, every street in Firozabad. Spirals of
bangles — sunny gold, paddy green, royal blue, pink, purple,
every colour born out of the seven colours of the
rainbow — lie in mounds in unkempt yards, are piled on
four-wheeled handcarts, pushed by young men along the
narrow lanes of the shanty town. And in dark hutments,
next to lines of flames of flickering oil lamps, sit boys and
girls with their fathers and mothers, welding pieces of
coloured glass into circles of bangles. Their eyes are more
adjusted to the dark than to the light outside. That is why
they often end up losing their eyesight before they become
adults.
Savita, a young girl in a drab pink dress, sits alongside
an elderly woman, soldering pieces of glass. As her hands
move mechanically like the tongs of a machine, I wonder if
she knows the sanctity of the bangles she helps make. It
symbolises an Indian woman’s suhaag, auspiciousness in
marriage. It will dawn on her suddenly one day when her
head is draped with a red veil, her hands dyed red with
henna, and red bangles rolled onto her wrists. She will
then become a bride. Like the old woman beside her who
became one many years ago. She still has bangles on her
wrist, but no light in her eyes. “Ek waqt ser bhar khana bhi
nahin khaya,” she says, in a voice drained of joy. She has
not enjoyed even one full meal in her entire lifetime —
that’s what she has reaped! Her husband, an old man
with a flowing beard, says, “I know nothing except bangles.
All I have done is make a house for the family to live in.”
Hearing him, one wonders if he has achieved what many
have failed in their lifetime. He has a roof over his head!
The cry of not having money to do anything except
carry on the business of making bangles, not even enough
to eat, rings in every home. The young men echo the lament
of their elders. Little has moved with time, it seems, in
Firozabad. Years of mind-numbing toil have killed all
initiative and the ability to dream.
“Why not organise yourselves into a cooperative?” I
bangles — sunny gold, paddy green, royal blue, pink, purple,
every colour born out of the seven colours of the
rainbow — lie in mounds in unkempt yards, are piled on
four-wheeled handcarts, pushed by young men along the
narrow lanes of the shanty town. And in dark hutments,
next to lines of flames of flickering oil lamps, sit boys and
girls with their fathers and mothers, welding pieces of
coloured glass into circles of bangles. Their eyes are more
adjusted to the dark than to the light outside. That is why
they often end up losing their eyesight before they become
adults.
Savita, a young girl in a drab pink dress, sits alongside
an elderly woman, soldering pieces of glass. As her hands
move mechanically like the tongs of a machine, I wonder if
she knows the sanctity of the bangles she helps make. It
symbolises an Indian woman’s suhaag, auspiciousness in
marriage. It will dawn on her suddenly one day when her
head is draped with a red veil, her hands dyed red with
henna, and red bangles rolled onto her wrists. She will
then become a bride. Like the old woman beside her who
became one many years ago. She still has bangles on her
wrist, but no light in her eyes. “Ek waqt ser bhar khana bhi
nahin khaya,” she says, in a voice drained of joy. She has
not enjoyed even one full meal in her entire lifetime —
that’s what she has reaped! Her husband, an old man
with a flowing beard, says, “I know nothing except bangles.
All I have done is make a house for the family to live in.”
Hearing him, one wonders if he has achieved what many
have failed in their lifetime. He has a roof over his head!
The cry of not having money to do anything except
carry on the business of making bangles, not even enough
to eat, rings in every home. The young men echo the lament
of their elders. Little has moved with time, it seems, in
Firozabad. Years of mind-numbing toil have killed all
initiative and the ability to dream.
“Why not organise yourselves into a cooperative?” I ask a group of young men who have fallen into the vicious
circle of middlemen who trapped their fathers and
forefathers. “Even if we get organised, we are the ones
who will be hauled up by the police, beaten and
dragged to jail for doing something illegal,”
they say. There is no leader among them,
no one who could help them see things
differently. Their fathers are as
tired as they are. They talk
endlessly in a spiral that
moves from poverty to
apathy to greed and to
injustice.
Listening to them, I
see two distinct worlds—
one of the family, caught
in a web of poverty,
burdened by the
stigma of caste in
which they are
born; the other
a vicious circle
of the sahukars,
the middlemen,
the policemen, the keepers of law, the bureaucrats and
the politicians. Together they have imposed the baggage
on the child that he cannot put down. Before he is aware,
he accepts it as naturally as his father. To do anything
else would mean to dare. And daring is not part of his
growing up. When I sense a flash of it in Mukesh I am
cheered. “I want to be a motor mechanic,’ he repeats. He
will go to a garage and learn. But the garage is a long way
from his home. “I will walk,” he
insists. “Do you also dream of
flying a plane?” He is suddenly
silent. “No,” he says, staring at
the ground. In his small murmur
there is an embarrassment that
has not yet turned into regret.
He is content to dream of cars
that he sees hurtling down the
streets of his town. Few airplanes
fly over Firozabad.;



Deep Water

It had happened when I was ten or eleven years old. I had
decided to learn to swim. There was a pool at the Y.M.C.A.
in Yakima that offered exactly the opportunity. The Yakima
River was treacherous. Mother continually warned against
it, and kept fresh in my mind the details of each drowning
in the river. But the Y.M.C.A. pool was safe. It was only
two or three feet deep at the shallow end; and while it was
nine feet deep at the other, the drop was gradual. I got a
pair of water wings and went to the pool. I hated to walk
naked into it and show my skinny legs. But I subdued my
pride and did it.
From the beginning, however, I had an aversion to the
water when I was in it. This started when I was three or
four years old and father took me to the beach in California.
He and I stood together in the surf. I hung on to him, yet
the waves knocked me down and swept over me. I was
buried in water. My breath was gone. I was frightened.
Father laughed, but there was terror in my heart at the
overpowering force of the waves.
My introduction to the Y.M.CA. swimming pool revived
unpleasant memories and stirred childish fears. But in a
little while I gathered confidence. I paddled with my new
water wings, watching the other boys and trying to learn
by aping them. I did this two or three times on different
days and was just beginning to feel at ease in the water
when the misadventure happened.
I went to the pool when no one else was there. The place
was quiet. The water was still, and the tiled bottom was as
white and clean as a bathtub. I was timid about going in
alone, so I sat on the side of the pool to wait for others.
I had not been there long when in came a big bruiser
of a boy, probably eighteen years old. He had thick hair on
his chest. He was a beautiful physical specimen, with legs
and arms that showed rippling muscles. He yelled, “Hi,
Skinny! How’d you like to be ducked?”
With that he picked me up and tossed me into the deep
end. I landed in a sitting position, swallowed water, and
went at once to the bottom. I was frightened, but not yet
frightened out of my wits. On the way down I planned:
When my feet hit the bottom, I would make a big jump,
come to the surface, lie flat on it, and paddle to the edge of
the pool.
It seemed a long way down. Those nine feet were more
like ninety, and before I touched bottom my lungs were
ready to burst. But when my feet hit bottom I summoned
all my strength and made what I thought was a great spring
upwards. I imagined I would bob to the surface like a cork.
Instead, I came up slowly. I opened my eyes and saw nothing
but water — water that had a dirty yellow tinge to it. I
grew panicky. I reached up as if to grab a rope and my
hands clutched only at water. I was suffocating. I tried to
yell but no sound came out. Then my eyes and nose came
out of the water — but not my mouth.
I flailed at the surface of the water, swallowed and
choked. I tried to bring my legs up, but they hung as dead
weights, paralysed and rigid. A great force was pulling me
under. I screamed, but only the water heard me. I had
started on the long journey back to the bottom of the pool.
I struck at the water as I went down, expending my
strength as one in a nightmare fights an irresistible force. I
had lost all my breath. My lungs ached, my head throbbed.
I was getting dizzy. But I remembered the strategy — I
would spring from the bottom of the pool and come like a
cork to the surface. I would lie flat on the water, strike out
with my arms, and thrash with my legs. Then I would get
to the edge of the pool and be safe.
I went down, down, endlessly. I opened my eyes. Nothing
but water with a yellow glow — dark water that one could
not see through.
And then sheer, stark terror seized me, terror that
knows no understanding, terror that knows no control,
terror that no one can understand who has not experienced
it. I was shrieking under water. I was paralysed under water
— stiff, rigid with fear. Even the screams in my throat were
frozen. Only my heart, and the pounding in my head, said
that I was still alive.
And then in the midst of the terror came a touch of
reason. I must remember to jump when I hit the bottom. At
last I felt the tiles under me. My toes reached out as if to
grab them. I jumped with everything I had.
But the jump made no difference. The water was still
around me. I looked for ropes, ladders, water wings. Nothing
but water. A mass of yellow water held me. Stark terror
took an even deeper hold on me, like a great charge of
electricity. I shook and trembled with fright. My arms
wouldn’t move. My legs wouldn’t move. I tried to call for
help, to call for mother. Nothing happened.
And then, strangely, there was light. I was coming out
of the awful yellow water. At least my eyes were. My nose
was almost out too.
Then I started down a third time. I sucked for air and
got water. The yellowish light was going out.
Then all effort ceased. I relaxed. Even my legs felt limp;
and a blackness swept over my brain. It wiped out fear; it
wiped out terror. There was no more panic. It was quiet
and peaceful. Nothing to be afraid of. This is nice... to be
drowsy... to go to sleep... no need to jump... too tired to
jump... it’s nice to be carried gently... to float along in space...
tender arms around me... tender arms like Mother’s... now
I must go to sleep...
I crossed to oblivion, and the
curtain of life fell.
The next I remember I was
lying on my stomach beside the
pool, vomiting. The chap that threw
me in was saying, “But I was only
fooling.” Someone said, “The kid
nearly died. Be all right now. Let’s
carry him to the locker room.”
Several hours later, I walked
home. I was weak and trembling.
I shook and cried when I lay on
my bed. I couldn’t eat that night. For days a haunting fear
was in my heart. The slightest exertion upset me, making
me wobbly in the knees and sick to my stomach.
I never went back to the pool. I feared water. I avoided
it whenever I could.
A few years later when I came to know the waters of
the Cascades, I wanted to get into them. And whenever I
did — whether I was wading the Tieton or Bumping River
or bathing in Warm Lake of the Goat Rocks — the terror
that had seized me in the pool would come back. It would
take possession of me completely. My legs would become
paralysed. Icy horror would grab my heart.
This handicap stayed with me as the years rolled by.
In canoes on Maine lakes fishing for landlocked salmon,
bass fishing in New Hampshire, trout fishing on the
Deschutes and Metolius in Oregon, fishing for salmon on
the Columbia, at Bumping Lake in the Cascades —
wherever I went, the haunting fear of the water followed
me. It ruined my fishing trips; deprived me of the joy of
canoeing, boating, and swimming.
I used every way I knew to overcome this fear, but it
held me firmly in its grip. Finally, one October, I decided to
get an instructor and learn to swim. I went to a pool and
practiced five days a week, an hour each day. The instructor
put a belt around me. A rope attached to the belt went
through a pulley that ran on an overhead cable. He held on
to the end of the rope, and we went back and forth, back
and forth across the pool, hour after hour, day after day,
week after week. On each trip across the pool a bit of the
panic seized me. Each time the instructor relaxed his hold
on the rope and I went under, some of the old terror returned
and my legs froze. It was three months before the tension
began to slack. Then he taught me to put my face under
water and exhale, and to raise my nose and inhale. I repeated
the exercise hundreds of times. Bit by bit I shed part of the
panic that seized me when my head went under water.
Next he held me at the side of the pool and had me
kick with my legs. For weeks I did just that. At first my
legs refused to work. But they gradually relaxed; and finally
I could command them.
Thus, piece by piece, he built a swimmer. And when he
had perfected each piece, he put them together into an
integrated whole. In April he said, “Now you can swim. Dive
off and swim the length of the pool, crawl stroke.”
I did. The instructor was finished.
But I was not finished. I still wondered if I would be
terror-stricken when I was alone in the pool. I tried it. I
swam the length up and down. Tiny vestiges of the old
terror would return. But now I could frown and say to that
terror, “Trying to scare me, eh? Well, here’s to you! Look!”
And off I’d go for another length of the pool.
This went on until July. But I was still not satisfied. I
was not sure that all the terror had left. So I went to Lake
Wentworth in New Hampshire, dived off a dock at Triggs
Island, and swam two miles across the lake to Stamp Act
Island. I swam the crawl, breast stroke, side stroke, and
back stroke. Only once did the terror return. When I was
in the middle of the lake, I put my face under and saw
nothing but bottomless water. The old sensation returned
in miniature. I laughed and said, “Well, Mr Terror, what do
you think you can do to me?” It fled and I swam on.
Yet I had residual doubts. At my first opportunity I
hurried west, went up the Tieton to Conrad Meadows, up
the Conrad Creek Trail to Meade Glacier, and camped in
the high meadow by the side of Warm Lake. The next
morning I stripped, dived into the lake, and swam across
to the other shore and back — just as Doug Corpron used
to do. I shouted with joy, and Gilbert Peak returned the
echo. I had conquered my fear of water.
The experience had a deep meaning for me, as only
those who have known stark terror and conquered it can
appreciate. In death there is peace. There is terror only in
the fear of death, as Roosevelt knew when he said, “All we
have to fear is fear itself.” Because
I had experienced both the
sensation of dying and the terror
that fear of it can produce, the
will to live somehow grew in
intensity.
At last I felt released — free
to walk the trails and climb the
peaks and to brush aside fear.;

The Rattrap

Once upon a time there was a man who went around selling
small rattraps of wire. He made them himself at odd
moments, from the material he got by begging in the stores
or at the big farms. But even so, the business was not
especially profitable, so he had to resort to both begging
and petty thievery to keep body and soul together. Even so,
his clothes were in rags, his cheeks were sunken, and
hunger gleamed in his eyes.
No one can imagine how sad and monotonous life can
appear to such a vagabond, who plods along the road, left
to his own meditations. But one day this man had fallen
into a line of thought, which really seemed to him
entertaining. He had naturally been thinking of his rattraps
when suddenly he was struck by the idea that the whole
world about him — the whole world with its lands and
seas, its cities and villages — was nothing but a big rattrap.
It had never existed for any other purpose than to set baits
for people. It offered riches and joys, shelter and food, heat
and clothing, exactly as the rattrap offered cheese and
pork, and as soon as anyone let himself be tempted to
touch the bait, it closed in on him, and then everything
came to an end.
The world had, of course, never been very kind to him,
so it gave him unwonted joy to think ill of it in this way. It
became a cherished pastime of his, during many dreary
ploddings, to think of people he knew who had let
themselves be caught in the dangerous snare, and of others
who were still circling around the bait.
One dark evening as he was trudging along the road
he caught sight of a little gray cottage by the roadside, and
he knocked on the door to ask shelter for the night. Nor
was he refused. Instead of the sour faces which ordinarily
met him, the owner, who was an old man without wife or
child, was happy to get someone to talk to in his loneliness.
Immediately he put the porridge pot on the fire and gave
him supper; then he carved off such a big slice from his
tobacco roll that it was enough both for the stranger’s pipe
and his own. Finally he got out an old pack of cards and
played ‘mjolis’ with his guest until bedtime.
The old man was just as generous with his confidences
as with his porridge and tobacco. The guest was informed
at once that in his days of prosperity his host had been a
crofter at Ramsjo Ironworks and had worked on the land.
Now that he was no longer able to do day labour, it was his
cow which supported him. Yes, that bossy was
extraordinary. She could give milk for the creamery every
day, and last month he had received all of thirty kronor in
payment.
The stranger must have seemed incredulous, for the
old man got up and went to the window, took down a leather
pouch which hung on a nail in the very window frame, and
picked out three wrinkled ten-kronor bills. These he held
up before the eyes of his guest, nodding knowingly, and
then stuffed them back into the
pouch.
The next day both men got up
in good season. The crofter was in
a hurry to milk his cow, and the
other man probably thought he
should not stay in bed when the
head of the house had gotten up.
They left the cottage at the same
time. The crofter locked the door
and put the key in his pocket. The
man with the rattraps said good
bye and thank you, and thereupon
each went his own way.
But half an hour later the
rattrap peddler stood again before
the door. He did not try to get in,
however. He only went up to the window, smashed a pane,
stuck in his hand, and got hold of the pouch with the
thirty kronor. He took the money and thrust it into his
own pocket. Then he hung the leather pouch very carefully
back in its place and went away.
As he walked along with the money in his pocket he
felt quite pleased with his smartness. He realised, of course,
that at first he dared not continue on the public highway,
but must turn off the road, into the woods. During the
first hours this caused him no difficulty. Later in the day
it became worse, for it was a big and confusing forest which
he had gotten into. He tried, to be sure, to walk in a definite
direction, but the paths twisted back and forth so strangely!
He walked and walked without coming to the end of the
wood, and finally he realised that he had only been walking
around in the same part of the forest. All at once he recalled
his thoughts about the world and the rattrap. Now his
own turn had come. He had let himself be fooled by a bait
and had been caught. The whole forest, with its trunks
and branches, its thickets and fallen logs, closed in upon
him like an impenetrable prison from which he could
never escape.
It was late in December. Darkness was already
descending over the forest. This increased the danger, and
increased also his gloom and despair. Finally he saw no
way out, and he sank down on the ground, tired to death,
thinking that his last moment had come. But just as he
laid his head on the ground, he heard a sound—a hard
regular thumping. There was no doubt as to what that
was. He raised himself. ‘‘Those are the hammer strokes
from an iron mill’’, he thought. ‘‘There must be people near
by’’. He summoned all his strength, got up, and staggered
in the direction of the sound.
The Ramsjo Ironworks, which are now closed down,
were, not so long ago, a large plant, with smelter, rolling
mill, and forge. In the summertime long lines of heavily
loaded barges and scows slid down the canal, which led to
a large inland lake, and in the wintertime the roads near
the mill were black from all the coal dust which sifted
down from the big charcoal crates.
During one of the long dark evenings just before
Christmas, the master smith and his helper sat in the
dark forge near the furnace waiting for the pig iron, which
had been put in the fire, to be ready to put on the anvil.
Every now and then one of them got up to stir the glowing
mass with a long iron bar, returning in a few moments,
dripping with perspiration, though, as was the custom, he
wore nothing but a long shirt and a pair of wooden shoes.
All the time there were many sounds to be heard in
the forge. The big bellows groaned and the burning coal
cracked. The fire boy shovelled charcoal into the maw of
the furnace with a great deal of clatter. Outside roared the
waterfall, and a sharp north wind whipped the rain against
the brick-tiled roof.
It was probably on account of all this noise that the
blacksmith did not notice that a man had opened the gate
and entered the forge, until he stood close up to the furnace.
Surely it was nothing unusual for poor vagabonds
without any better shelter for the night to be attracted to
the forge by the glow of light which escaped through the
sooty panes, and to come in to warm themselves in front of
the fire. The blacksmiths glanced only casually and
indifferently at the intruder. He looked the way people of
his type usually did, with a long beard, dirty, ragged, and
with a bunch of rattraps dangling on his chest.
He asked permission to stay, and the master blacksmith
nodded a haughty consent without honouring him with a
single word.
The tramp did not say anything, either. He had not
come there to talk but only to warm himself and sleep.
In those days the Ramsjo iron mill was owned by a
very prominent ironmaster, whose greatest ambition was
to ship out good iron to the market. He watched both night
and day to see that the work was done as well as possible,
and at this very moment he came into the forge on one of
his nightly rounds of inspection.
Naturally the first thing he saw was the tall ragamuffin
who had eased his way so close to the furnace that steam
rose from his wet rags. The ironmaster did not follow the
example of the blacksmiths, who had hardly deigned to
look at the stranger. He walked close up to him, looked
him over very carefully, then tore off his slouch hat to get
a better view of his face.
‘‘But of course it is you, Nils Olof!’’ he said. “How you
do look!”
The man with the rattraps had never before seen the
ironmaster at Ramsjo and did not even know what his
name was. But it occurred to him that if the fine gentleman
thought he was an old acquaintance, he might perhaps
throw him a couple of kronor. Therefore he did not want to
undeceive him all at once.
‘‘Yes, God knows things have gone downhill with me’’,
he said.
‘‘You should not have resigned from the regiment’’, said
the ironmaster. ‘‘That was the mistake. If only I had still
been in the service at the time, it never would have happened.
Well, now of course you will come home with me.’’
To go along up to the manor house and be received by
the owner like an old regimental comrade — that, however,
did not please the tramp.
‘‘No, I couldn’t think of it!’’ he said, looking quite
alarmed.
He thought of the thirty kronor. To go up to the manor
house would be like throwing himself voluntarily into the
lion’s den. He only wanted a chance to sleep here in the
forge and then sneak away as inconspicuously as possible.
The ironmaster assumed that he felt embarrassed
because of his miserable clothing.
‘‘Please don’t think that I have such a fine home that
you cannot show yourself there’’, He said... ‘‘Elizabeth is
dead, as you may already have heard. My boys are abroad,
and there is no one at home except my oldest daughter
and myself. We were just saying that it was too bad we
didn’t have any company for Christmas. Now come along
with me and help us make the Christmas food disappear a
little faster.”
But the stranger said no, and
no, and again no, and the ironmaster
saw that he must give in.
‘‘It looks as though Captain
von Stahle preferred to stay with
you tonight, Stjernstrom’’, he said
to the master blacksmith, and
turned on his heel.
But he laughed to himself
as he went away, and the blacksmith,
who knew him, understood very well
that he had not said his last word.
It was not more than half an hour before they heard
the sound of carriage wheels outside the forge, and a new
guest came in, but this time it was not the ironmaster. He
had sent his daughter, apparently hoping that she would
have better powers of persuasion than he himself.
She entered, followed by a valet, carrying on his arm a
big fur coat. She was not at all pretty, but seemed modest
and quite shy. In the forge everything was just as it had
been earlier in the evening. The master blacksmith and
his apprentice still sat on their bench, and iron and
charcoal still glowed in the furnace. The stranger had
stretched himself out on the floor and lay with a piece of
pig iron under his head and his hat pulled down over his
eyes. As soon as the young girl caught sight of him, she
went up and lifted his hat. The man was evidently used to
sleeping with one eye open. He jumped up abruptly and
seemed to be quite frightened.
‘‘My name is Edla Willmansson,’’ said the young girl.
‘‘My father came home and said that you wanted to sleep
here in the forge tonight, and then I asked permission to
come and bring you home to us. I am so sorry, Captain,
that you are having such a hard time.’’
She looked at him compassionately, with her heavy
eyes, and then she noticed that the man was afraid. ‘‘Either
he has stolen something or else he has escaped from, jail’’,
she thought, and added quickly, “You may be sure, Captain,
that you will be allowed to leave us just as freely as you
came. Only please stay with us over Christmas Eve.’’
She said this in such a friendly manner that the
rattrap peddler must have felt confidence in her.
‘‘It would never have occurred to me that you would
bother with me yourself, miss,’’ he said. ‘’I will come at
once.’’
He accepted the fur coat, which the valet handed him
with a deep bow, threw it over his rags, and followed the
young lady out to the carriage, without granting the
astonished blacksmiths so much as a glance.
But while he was riding up to the manor house he had
evil forebodings.
‘‘Why the devil did I take that fellow’s money?’’ he
thought. ‘‘Now I am sitting in the trap and will never get
out of it.’’
The next day was Christmas Eve, and when the
ironmaster came into the dining room for breakfast he
probably thought with satisfaction of his old regimental
comrade whom he had run across so unexpectedly.
“First of all we must see to it that he gets a little flesh
on his bones,” he said to his daughter, who was busy at
the table. “And then we must see that he gets something
else to do than to run around the country selling rattraps.”
“It is queer that things have gone downhill with him
as badly as that,” said the daughter. “Last night I did not
think there was anything about him to show that he had
once been an educated man.”
“You must have patience, my little girl,” said the father.
“As soon as he gets clean and dressed up, you will see
something different. Last night he was naturally
embarrassed. The tramp manners will fall away from him
with the tramp clothes.”
Just as he said this the door opened and the stranger
entered. Yes, now he was truly clean and well dressed.
The valet had bathed him, cut his hair, and shaved him.
Moreover he was dressed in a good-looking suit of clothes
which belonged to the ironmaster. He wore a white shirt
and a starched collar and whole shoes.
But although his guest was now so well groomed, the
ironmaster did not seem pleased. He looked at him with
puckered brow, and it was easy to understand that when
he had seen the strange fellow in the uncertain reflection
from the furnace he might have made a mistake, but that
now, when he stood there in broad daylight, it was
impossible to mistake him for an old acquaintance.
“What does this mean?” he thundered.
The stranger made no attempt to dissimulate. He saw
at once that the splendour had come to an end.
“It is not my fault, sir,” he said. “I never pretended to
be anything but a poor trader, and I pleaded and begged to
be allowed to stay in the forge. But no harm has been
done. At worst I can put on my rags again and go away”.
“Well,” said the ironmaster, hesitating a little, “it was
not quite honest, either. You must admit that, and I should
not be surprised if the sheriff would like to have something
to say in the matter.”
The tramp took a step forward and struck the table
with his fist.
“Now I am going to tell you, Mr Ironmaster, how things
are,” he said. “This whole world is nothing but a big rattrap.
All the good things that are offered to you are nothing but
cheese rinds and bits of pork, set out to drag a poor fellow
into trouble. And if the sheriff comes now and locks me up
for this, then you, Mr Ironmaster, must remember that a
day may come when you yourself may want to get a big
piece of pork, and then you will get caught in the trap.”
The ironmaster began to laugh.
“That was not so badly said, my good fellow. Perhaps
we should let the sheriff alone on Christmas Eve. But now
get out of here as fast as you can.”
But just as the man was opening the door, the daughter
said, “I think he ought to stay with us today. I don’t want
him to go.” And with that she went and closed the door.
“What in the world are you doing?” said the father.
The daughter stood there quite embarrassed and hardly
knew what to answer. That morning she had felt so happy
when she thought how homelike and Christmassy she was
going to make things for the poor hungry wretch. She could
not get away from the idea all at once, and that was why
she had interceded for the vagabond.
“I am thinking of this stranger here,” said the young
girl. “He walks and walks the whole year long, and there is
probably not a single place in the whole country where he
is welcome and can feel at home. Wherever he turns he is
chased away. Always he is afraid of being arrested and
cross-examined. I should like to have him enjoy a day of
peace with us here — just one in the whole year.”
The ironmaster mumbled something in his beard. He
could not bring himself to oppose her.
“It was all a mistake, of course,” she continued. “But
anyway I don’t think we ought to chase away a human
being whom we have asked to come here, and to whom we
have promised Christmas cheer.”
“You do preach worse than a parson,” said the
ironmaster. “I only hope you won’t have to regret this.”
The young girl took the stranger by the hand and led
him up to the table.
“Now sit down and eat,” she said, for she could see
that her father had given in.
The man with the rattraps said not a word; he only
sat down and helped himself to the food. Time after time
he looked at the young girl who had interceded for him.
Why had she done it? What could the crazy idea be?
After that, Christmas Eve at Ramsjo passed just as it
always had. The stranger did not cause any trouble because
he did nothing but sleep. The whole forenoon he lay on the
sofa in one of the guest rooms and slept at one stretch. At
noon they woke him up so that he could have his share of
the good Christmas fare, but after that he slept again. It
seemed as though for many years he had not been able to
sleep as quietly and safely as here at Ramsjo.
In the evening, when the Christmas tree was lighted,
they woke him up again, and he stood for a while in the
drawing room, blinking as though the candlelight hurt him,
but after that he disappeared again. Two hours later he
was aroused once more. He then had to go down into the
dining room and eat the Christmas fish and porridge.
As soon as they got up from the table he went around
to each one present and said thank you and good night,
but when he came to the young
girl she gave him to understand
that it was her father’s intention
that the suit which he wore was
to be a Christmas present — he
did not have to return it; and if
he wanted to spend next
Christmas Eve in a place where
he could rest in peace, and be
sure that no evil would befall him,
he would be welcomed back again.
The man with the rattraps
did not answer anything to this.
He only stared at the young girl
in boundless amazement.
The next morning the
ironmaster and his daughter got
up in good season to go to the early Christmas service.
Their guest was still asleep, and they did not disturb him.
When, at about ten o’clock, they drove back from the
church, the young girl sat and hung her head even more
dejectedly than usual. At church she had learned that one
of the old crofters of the ironworks had been robbed by a
man who went around selling rattraps.
“Yes, that was a fine fellow you let into the house,”
said her father. “I only wonder how many silver spoons are
left in the cupboard by this time.”
The wagon had hardly stopped at the front steps when
the ironmaster asked the valet whether the stranger was
still there. He added that he had heard at church that the
man was a thief. The valet answered that the fellow had
gone and that he had not taken anything with him at all.
On the contrary, he had left behind a little package which
Miss Willmansson was to be kind enough to accept as a
Christmas present.
The young girl opened the package, which was so badly
done up that the contents came into view at once. She
gave a little cry of joy. She found a small rattrap, and in it
lay three wrinkled ten kronor notes. But that was not all.
In the rattrap lay also a letter written in large, jagged
characters —
“Honoured and noble Miss,
“Since you have been so nice to
me all day long, as if I was a
captain, I want to be nice to you,
in return, as if I was a real
captain — for I do not want you
to be embarrassed at this
Christmas season by a thief; but
you can give back the money to
the old man on the roadside, who has the money pouch
hanging on the window frame as a bait for poor wanderers.
“The rattrap is a Christmas present from a rat who
would have been caught in this world’s rattrap if he had
not been raised to captain, because in that way he got
power to clear himself.
“Written with friendship
and high regard,
“Captain von Stahle.”;

______________________________________________________________________XII-I

Indigo

When I first visited Gandhi in 1942 at his ashram in
Sevagram, in central India, he said, “I will tell you how it
happened that I decided to urge the departure of the British.
It was in 1917.”
He had gone to the December 1916 annual convention
of the Indian National Congress party in Lucknow. There
were 2,301 delegates and many visitors. During the
proceedings, Gandhi recounted, “a peasant came up to me
looking like any other peasant in India, poor and emaciated,
and said, ‘I am Rajkumar Shukla. I am from Champaran,
and I want you to come to my district’!’’ Gandhi had never
heard of the place. It was in the foothills of the towering
Himalayas, near the kingdom of Nepal.
Under an ancient arrangement, the Champaran
peasants were sharecroppers. Rajkumar Shukla was one
of them. He was illiterate but resolute. He had come to the
Congress session to complain about the injustice of the
landlord system in Bihar, and somebody had probably said,
“Speak to Gandhi.”
Gandhi told Shukla he had an appointment in
Cawnpore and was also committed to go to other parts of
India. Shukla accompanied him everywhere. Then Gandhi
returned to his ashram near Ahmedabad. Shukla followed
him to the ashram. For weeks he never left Gandhi’s side.
“Fix a date,” he begged.
Impressed by the sharecropper’s tenacity and story
Gandhi said, ‘‘I have to be in Calcutta on such-and-such a
date. Come and meet me and take me from there.”
Months passed. Shukla was
sitting on his haunches at the
appointed spot in Calcutta when
Gandhi arrived; he waited till Gandhi
was free. Then the two of them
boarded a train for the city of Patna
in Bihar. There Shukla led him to
the house of a lawyer named
Rajendra Prasad who later became
President of the Congress party and
of India. Rajendra Prasad was out
of town, but the servants knew
Shukla as a poor yeoman who
pestered their master to help the
indigo sharecroppers. So they let
him stay on the grounds with his
companion, Gandhi, whom they took
to be another peasant. But Gandhi
was not permitted to draw water
from the well lest some drops from his bucket pollute the entire
source; how did they know that he was not an untouchable?
Gandhi decided to go first to Muzzafarpur, which was
en route to Champaran, to obtain more complete
information about conditions than Shukla was capable of
imparting. He accordingly sent a telegram to Professor
J.B. Kripalani, of the Arts College in Muzzafarpur, whom
he had seen at Tagore’s Shantiniketan school. The train
arrived at midnight, 15 April 1917. Kripalani was waiting
at the station with a large body of students. Gandhi stayed
there for two days in the home of Professor Malkani, a
teacher in a government school.
‘‘It was an extraordinary
thing ‘in those days,’’ Gandhi
commented, “for a government
professor to harbour a man
like me”. In smaller localities,
the Indians were afraid
to show sympathy for
advocates of home-rule.
The news of Gandhi’s
advent and of the nature of
his mission spread quickly
through Muzzafarpur and to
Champaran. Sharecroppers
from Champaran began
arriving on foot and by
conveyance to see their
champion. Muzzafarpur lawyers
called on Gandhi to brief him;
they frequently represented
peasant groups in court; they
told him about their cases and
reported the size of their fee.
Gandhi chided the lawyers for
collecting big fee from the
sharecroppers. He said, ‘‘I have
come to the conclusion that we
should stop going to law courts.
Taking such cases to the courts
does litte good. Where the peasants
are so crushed and fear-stricken,
law courts are useless. The real relief
for them is to be free from fear.’’
Most of the arable land
in the Champaran district
was divided into large
estates owned by Englishmen and worked by Indian tenants.
The chief commercial crop was indigo. The landlords
compelled all tenants to plant three twentieths or 15 per
cent of their holdings with indigo and surrender the entire
indigo harvest as rent. This was done by long-term contract.
Presently, the landlords learned
that Germany had developed
synthetic indigo. They, thereupon,
obtained agreements from the
sharecroppers to pay them
compensation for being released
from the 15 per cent arrangement.
The sharecropping arrangement
was irksome to the peasants, and
many signed willingly. Those who
resisted, engaged lawyers; the
landlords hired thugs. Meanwhile,
the information about synthetic
indigo reached the illiterate peasants
who had signed, and they wanted
their money back.
At this point Gandhi arrived in Champaran.
He began by trying to get the facts. First he visited the
secretary of the British landlord’s association. The secretary
told him that they could give no information to an outsider.
Gandhi answered that he was no outsider.
Next, Gandhi called on the British official commissioner
of the Tirhut division in which the Champaran district
lay. ‘‘The commissioner,’’ Gandhi reports, ‘‘proceeded to bully
me and advised me forthwith to leave Tirhut.’’
Gandhi did not leave. Instead he proceeded to Motihari,
the capital of Champaran. Several lawyers accompanied him.
At the railway station, a vast multitude greeted Gandhi. He
went to a house and, using it as headquarters, continued his
investigations. A report came in that a peasant had been
maltreated in a nearby village. Gandhi decided to go and see;
the next morning he started out on the back of an elephant.
He had not proceeded far when the police superintendent’s
messenger overtook him and ordered him to return to town
in his carriage. Gandhi complied. The messenger drove
Gandhi home where he served him with an official notice to
quit Champaran immediately. Gandhi signed a receipt for
the notice and wrote on it that he would disobey the order.
In consequence, Gandhi received a summons to appear
in court the next day.
All night Gandhi remained awake. He telegraphed
Rajendra Prasad to come from Bihar with influential
friends. He sent instructions to the ashram. He wired a
full report to the Viceroy.
Morning found the town of Motihari black with peasants.
They did not know Gandhi’s record in South Africa. They
had merely heard that a Mahatma who wanted to help them
was in trouble with the authorities. Their spontaneous
demonstration, in thousands, around the courthouse was
the beginning of their liberation from fear of the British.
The officials felt powerless without Gandhi’s
cooperation. He helped them regulate the crowd. He was
polite and friendly. He was giving them concrete proof that
their might, hitherto dreaded and unquestioned, could be
challenged by Indians.
The government was baffled. The prosecutor requested
the judge to postpone the trial. Apparently, the authorities
wished to consult their superiors.
Gandhi protested against the delay. He read a statement
pleading guilty. He was involved, he told the court, in a
“conflict of duties”— on the one hand, not to set a bad example
as a lawbreaker; on the other hand, to render the
“humanitarian and national service” for which he had come.
He disregarded the order to leave, “not for want of respect for
lawful authority, but in obedience to the higher law of our
being, the voice of conscience”. He asked the penalty due.
The magistrate announced that he would pronounce
sentence after a two-hour recess and asked Gandhi to
furnish bail for those 120 minutes. Gandhi refused. The
judge released him without bail.
When the court reconvened, the judge said he would
not deliver the judgment for several days. Meanwhile he
allowed Gandhi to remain at liberty.
in his carriage. Gandhi complied. The messenger drove
Gandhi home where he served him with an official notice to
quit Champaran immediately. Gandhi signed a receipt for
the notice and wrote on it that he would disobey the order.
In consequence, Gandhi received a summons to appear
in court the next day.
All night Gandhi remained awake. He telegraphed
Rajendra Prasad to come from Bihar with influential
friends. He sent instructions to the ashram. He wired a
full report to the Viceroy.
Morning found the town of Motihari black with peasants.
They did not know Gandhi’s record in South Africa. They
had merely heard that a Mahatma who wanted to help them
was in trouble with the authorities. Their spontaneous
demonstration, in thousands, around the courthouse was
the beginning of their liberation from fear of the British.
The officials felt powerless without Gandhi’s
cooperation. He helped them regulate the crowd. He was
polite and friendly. He was giving them concrete proof that
their might, hitherto dreaded and unquestioned, could be
challenged by Indians.
The government was baffled. The prosecutor requested
the judge to postpone the trial. Apparently, the authorities
wished to consult their superiors.
Gandhi protested against the delay. He read a statement
pleading guilty. He was involved, he told the court, in a
“conflict of duties”— on the one hand, not to set a bad example
as a lawbreaker; on the other hand, to render the
“humanitarian and national service” for which he had come.
He disregarded the order to leave, “not for want of respect for
lawful authority, but in obedience to the higher law of our
being, the voice of conscience”. He asked the penalty due.
The magistrate announced that he would pronounce
sentence after a two-hour recess and asked Gandhi to
furnish bail for those 120 minutes. Gandhi refused. The
judge released him without bail.
When the court reconvened, the judge said he would
not deliver the judgment for several days. Meanwhile he
allowed Gandhi to remain at liberty.
Rajendra Prasad, Brij Kishor Babu, Maulana Mazharul
Huq and several other prominent lawyers had arrived from
Bihar. They conferred with Gandhi. What would they do if
he was sentenced to prison, Gandhi asked. Why, the senior
lawyer replied, they had come to advise and help him; if
he went to jail there would be nobody to advise and they
would go home.
What about the injustice to the sharecroppers, Gandhi
demanded. The lawyers withdrew to consult. Rajendra
Prasad has recorded the upshot of their consultations —
“They thought, amongst themselves, that Gandhi was totally
a stranger, and yet he was prepared to go to prison for the
sake of the peasants; if they, on the other hand, being not
only residents of the adjoining districts but also those who
claimed to have served these peasants, should go home, it
would be shameful desertion.”
They accordingly went back
to Gandhi and told him they were
ready to follow him into jail. ‘‘The
battle of Champaran is won,’’ he
exclaimed. Then he took a piece
of paper and divided the group
into pairs and put down the order
in which each pair was to court
arrest.
Several days later, Gandhi
received a written communication
from the magistrate informing
him that the Lieutenant-Governor of the province had
ordered the case to be dropped. Civil disobedience had
triumphed, the first time in modern India.
Gandhi and the lawyers now proceeded to conduct a
far-flung inquiry into the grievances of the farmers.
Depositions by about ten thousand peasants were written
down, and notes made on other evidence. Documents were
collected. The whole area throbbed with the activity of the
investigators and the vehement protests of the landlords.
In June, Gandhi was summoned to Sir Edward
Gait, the Lieutenant-Governor. Before he went he met
leading associates and again
laid detailed plans for civil
disobedience if he should not
return.
Gandhi had four protracted
interviews with the Lieutenant-
Governor who, as a result,
appointed an official commission
of inquiry into the indigo
sharecroppers’ situation.
The commission consisted of
landlords, government officials,
and Gandhi as the sole
representative of the peasants.
Gandhi remained in Champaran for an initial
uninterrupted period of seven months and then again for
several shorter visits. The visit, undertaken casually on
the entreaty of an unlettered peasant in the expectation
that it would last a few days, occupied almost a year of
Gandhi’s life.
The official inquiry assembled a crushing mountain of
evidence against the big planters, and when they saw this
they agreed, in principle, to make refunds to the peasants.
“But how much must we pay?” they asked Gandhi.
They thought he would demand repayment in full of
the money which they had illegally and deceitfully extorted
from the sharecroppers. He asked only 50 per cent. “There
he seemed adamant,” writes Reverend J. Z. Hodge, a British
missionary in Champaran who observed the entire episode
at close range. “Thinking probably that he would not give
way, the representative of the planters offered to refund to
the extent of 25 per cent, and to his amazement Mr. Gandhi
took him at his word, thus breaking the deadlock.”
This settlement was adopted unanimously by the
commission. Gandhi explained that the amount of the
refund was less important than the fact that the landlords
had been obliged to surrender part of the money and, with
it, part of their prestige. Therefore, as far as the peasants
were concerned, the planters had behaved as lords above
the law. Now the peasant saw that he had rights and
defenders. He learned courage.
Events justified Gandhi’s position. Within a few years
the British planters abandoned their estates, which
reverted to the peasants. Indigo sharecropping disappeared.
Gandhi never contented himself with large political or
economic solutions. He saw the cultural and social
backwardness in the Champaran villages and wanted to
do something about it immediately. He appealed for
teachers. Mahadev Desai and Narhari Parikh, two young
men who had just joined Gandhi as disciples, and their
wives, volunteered for the work. Several more came from
Bombay, Poona and other distant
parts of the land. Devadas,
Gandhi’s youngest son, arrived
from the ashram and so did Mrs.
Gandhi. Primary schools were
opened in six villages. Kasturbai
taught the ashram rules on
personal cleanliness and
community sanitation.
Health conditions were miserable. Gandhi got a doctor
to volunteer his services for six months. Three medicines
were available — castor oil, quinine and sulphur ointment.
Anybody who showed a coated tongue was given a dose of
castor oil; anybody with malaria fever received quinine
plus castor oil; anybody with skin eruptions received
ointment plus castor oil.
Gandhi noticed the filthy state of women’s clothes. He
asked Kasturbai to talk to them about it. One woman took
Kasturbai into her hut and said, ‘‘Look, there is no box or
cupboard here for clothes. The sari I am wearing is the
only one I have.”
During his long stay in Champaran, Gandhi kept a
long distance watch on the ashram. He sent regular
instructions by mail and asked for financial accounts. Once
he wrote to the residents that it was time to fill in the old
latrine trenches and dig new ones otherwise the old ones
would begin to smell bad.
The Champaran episode was a turning-point in
Gandhi’s life. ‘‘What I did,” he explained, “was a very
ordinary thing. I declared that the British could not order
me about in my own country.”
But Champaran did not begin as an act of defiance. It
grew out of an attempt to alleviate the distress of large
numbers of poor peasants. This was the typical Gandhi
pattern — his politics were intertwined with the practical,
day-to-day problems of the millions. His was not a loyalty
to abstractions; it was a loyalty to living, human beings.
In everything Gandhi did, moreover, he tried to mould
a new free Indian who could stand on his own feet and
thus make India free.
Early in the Champaran action, Charles Freer Andrews,
the English pacifist who had become a devoted follower of
the Mahatma, came to bid Gandhi farewell before going on
a tour of duty to the Fiji Islands. Gandhi’s lawyer friends
thought it would be a good idea for Andrews to stay in
Champaran and help them. Andrews was willing if Gandhi
agreed. But Gandhi was vehemently opposed. He said, ‘‘You
think that in this unequal fight it would be helpful if we
have an Englishman on our side. This shows the weakness
of your heart. The cause is just and you must rely upon
yourselves to win the battle. You should not seek a prop in
Mr. Andrews because he happens to be an Englishman’’.
‘‘He had read our minds correctly,’’ Rajendra Prasad
comments, “and we had no reply… Gandhi in this way taught
us a lesson in self-reliance’’.
Self-reliance, Indian independence and help to
sharecroppers were all bound together.;

Poets and Pancakes


Pancake was the brand name of the make-up material that
Gemini Studios bought in truck-loads. Greta Garbo1 must
have used it, Miss Gohar must have used it, Vyjayantimala2
must also have used it but Rati Agnihotri may not have
even heard of it. The make-up department of the Gemini
Studios was in the upstairs of a building that was believed
to have been Robert Clive’s stables. A dozen other buildings
in the city are said to have been his residence. For his
brief life and an even briefer stay in Madras, Robert Clive
seems to have done a lot of moving, besides fighting some
impossible battles in remote corners of India and marrying
a maiden in St. Mary’s Church in Fort St. George in
Madras.
The make-up room had the look of a hair-cutting salon
with lights at all angles around half a dozen large mirrors.
They were all incandescent lights, so you can imagine the
fiery misery of those subjected to make-up. The make-up
department was first headed by a Bengali who became too
big for a studio and left. He was succeeded by a
Maharashtrian who was assisted by a Dharwar Kannadiga,
an Andhra, a Madras Indian Christian, an Anglo-Burmese
and the usual local Tamils. All this shows that there was a
great deal of national integration long before A.I.R. and
Doordarshan began broadcasting programmes on national
integration. This gang of nationally integrated make-up men
could turn any decent-looking person into a hideous crimson
hued monster with the help of truck-loads of pancake and a
number of other locally made potions and lotions. Those
were the days of mainly indoor shooting, and only five
per cent of the film was shot outdoors. I suppose the sets
and studio lights needed the girls and boys to be made to
look ugly in order to look presentable in the movie. A strict
hierarchy was maintained in the
make-up department. The chief
make-up man made the chief actors
and actresses ugly, his senior
assistant the ‘second’ hero and
heroine, the junior assistant the main
comedian, and so forth. The players
who played the crowd were the
responsibility of the office boy. (Even
the make-up department of the
Gemini Studio had an ‘office boy’!) On
the days when there was a crowdshooting,
you could see him mixing
his paint in a giant vessel and
slapping it on the crowd players. The idea was to close every
pore on the surface of the face in the process of applying
make-up. He wasn’t exactly a ‘boy’; he was in his early forties,
having entered the studios years ago in the hope of becoming
a star actor or a top screen writer,
director or lyrics writer. He was a
bit of a poet.
In those days I worked in a
cubicle, two whole sides of which
were French windows. (I didn’t
know at that time they were called
French windows.) Seeing me
sitting at my desk tearing up
newspapers day in and day out,
most people thought I was doing
next to nothing. It is likely that
the Boss thought likewise too. So
anyone who felt I should be given
some occupation would barge into
my cubicle and deliver an extended lecture. The ‘boy’ in the
make-up department had decided I should be enlightened
on how great literary talent was being allowed to go waste in
a department fit only for barbers and perverts. Soon I was
praying for crowd-shooting all the time. Nothing short of it
could save me from his epics.
In all instances of frustration, you will always find
the anger directed towards a single person openly or covertly
and this man of the make-up department was convinced
that all his woes, ignominy and neglect were due to
Kothamangalam Subbu. Subbu was the No. 2 at Gemini
Studios. He couldn’t have had a more encouraging opening
in films than our grown-up make-up boy had. On the
contrary he must have had to face more uncertain and
difficult times, for when he began his career, there were
no firmly established film producing companies or studios.
Even in the matter of education, specially formal education,
Subbu couldn’t have had an appreciable lead over our boy.
But by virtue of being born a Brahmin — a virtue, indeed!
— he must have had exposure to more affluent situations
and people. He had the ability to look cheerful at all times
even after having had a hand in a flop film. He always had
work for somebody — he could never do things on his own
— but his sense of loyalty made him identify himself with
his principal completely and turn his entire creativity to
his principal’s advantage. He was tailor-made for films.
Here was a man who could be inspired when commanded.
“The rat fights the tigress underwater and kills her but
takes pity on the cubs and tends them lovingly — I don’t
know how to do the scene,” the producer would say and
Subbu would come out with four ways of the rat pouring
affection on its victim’s offspring. “Good, but I am not sure
it is effective enough,” the producer would say and in a
minute Subbu would come out with fourteen more
alternatives. Film-making must have been and was so easy
with a man like Subbu around and if ever there was a man
who gave direction and definition to Gemini Studios during
its golden years, it was Subbu. Subbu had a separate
identity as a poet and though he was certainly capable of
more complex and higher forms, he deliberately chose to
address his poetry to the masses. His success in films
overshadowed and dwarfed his literary achievements — or
so his critics felt. He composed several truly original ‘story
poems’ in folk refrain and diction and also wrote a sprawling
novel Thillana Mohanambal with dozens of very deftly etched
characters. He quite successfully recreated the mood and
manner of the Devadasis of the early 20th century. He
was an amazing actor — he never aspired to the lead roles
— but whatever subsidiary role he played in any of the
films, he performed better than the supposed main players.
He had a genuine love for anyone he came across and his
house was a permanent residence for dozens of near and
far relations and acquaintances. It seemed against Subbu’s
nature to be even conscious that he was feeding and
supporting so many of them. Such a charitable and
improvident man, and yet he had enemies! Was it because
he seemed so close and intimate with The Boss? Or was it
his general demeanour that resembled a sycophant’s? Or
his readiness to say nice things about everything? In any
case, there was this man in the make-up department who
would wish the direst things for Subbu.
You saw Subbu always with The Boss but in the
attendance rolls, he was grouped under a department called
the Story Department comprising a lawyer and an assembly
of writers and poets. The lawyer was also officially known
as the legal adviser, but everybody referred to him as the
opposite. An extremely talented actress, who was also
extremely temperamental, once blew over on the sets. While
everyone stood stunned, the lawyer quietly switched on
the recording equipment. When the actress paused for
breath, the lawyer said to her, “One minute, please,” and
played back the recording. There was nothing incriminating
or unmentionably foul about the actress’s tirade against
the producer. But when she heard her voice again through
the sound equipment, she was struck dumb. A girl from
the countryside, she hadn’t gone through all the stages of
worldly experience that generally precede a position of
importance and sophistication that she had found herself
catapulted into. She never quite recovered from the terror
she felt that day. That was the end of a brief and brilliant
acting career — the legal adviser,
who was also a member of the
Story Department, had
unwittingly brought about that
sad end. While every other
member of the Department wore
a kind of uniform — khadi dhoti
with a slightly oversized and
clumsily tailored white khadi shirt
— the legal adviser wore pants
and a tie and sometimes a coat
that looked like a coat of mail.
Often he looked alone and
helpless — a man of cold logic in
a crowd of dreamers — a neutral
man in an assembly of Gandhiites
and khadiites. Like so many of those who were close to
The Boss, he was allowed to produce a film and though a
lot of raw stock and pancake were used on it, not much
came of the film. Then one day The Boss closed down the
Story Department and this was perhaps the only instance
in all human history where a lawyer lost his job because
the poets were asked to go home.
Gemini Studios was the favourite haunt of poets like
S.D.S.Yogiar3, Sangu Subramanyam, Krishna Sastry and
Harindranath Chattopadhyaya4. It had an excellent mess
which supplied good coffee at all times of the day and for
most part of the night. Those were the days when Congress
rule meant Prohibition and meeting over a cup of coffee
was rather satisfying entertainment. Barring the office boys
and a couple of clerks, everybody else at the Studios
radiated leisure, a pre-requisite for poetry. Most of them
wore khadi and worshipped Gandhiji but beyond that they
had not the faintest appreciation for political thought of
any kind. Naturally, they were all averse to the term
‘Communism’. A Communist was a godless man — he had
no filial or conjugal love; he had no compunction about
killing his own parents or his children; he was always out
to cause and spread unrest and violence among innocent
and ignorant people. Such notions which prevailed
everywhere else in South India at that time also, naturally,
floated about vaguely among the khadi-clad poets of Gemini
Studios. Evidence of it was soon forthcoming.
When Frank Buchman’s Moral Re-Armament army,
some two hundred strong, visited Madras sometime in 1952,
they could not have found a warmer host in India than the
Gemini Studios. Someone called the group an international
circus. They weren’t very good on the trapeze and their
acquaintance with animals was only at the dinner table,
but they presented two plays in a most professional manner.
Their ‘Jotham Valley’ and ‘The Forgotten Factor’ ran several
shows in Madras and along with the other citizens of the
city, the Gemini family of six hundred saw the plays over
and over again. The message of the plays were usually
plain and simple homilies, but the sets and costumes were
first-rate. Madras and the Tamil drama community were
terribly impressed and for some years almost all Tamil plays
had a scene of sunrise and sunset in the manner of ‘Jotham
Valley’ with a bare stage, a white background curtain and
a tune played on the flute. It was some years later that I
learnt that the MRA was a kind of counter-movement to
international Communism and the big bosses of Madras
like Mr. Vasan simply played into their hands. I am not
sure however, that this was indeed the case, for the
unchangeable aspects of these big bosses and
their enterprises remained the same, MRA or no MRA,
international Communism or no international Communism.
The staff of Gemini Studios had a nice time hosting two
hundred people of all hues and sizes of at least twenty
nationalities. It was such a change from the usual collection
of crowd players waiting to be slapped with thick layers of
make-up by the office-boy in the make-up department.
A few months later, the telephone lines of the big bosses
of Madras buzzed and once again we at Gemini Studios
cleared a whole shooting stage to welcome another visitor.
All they said was that he was a poet from England. The
only poets from England the simple Gemini staff knew or
heard of were Wordsworth and Tennyson; the more literate
ones knew of Keats, Shelley and Byron; and one or two
might have faintly come to know of someone by the name
Eliot. Who was the poet visiting the Gemini Studios now?
“He is not a poet. He is an editor. That’s why The Boss
is giving him a big reception.” Vasan was also the editor of
the popular Tamil weekly Ananda Vikatan.
He wasn’t the editor of any of the known names of
British publications in Madras, that is, those known at
the Gemini Studios. Since the top men of The Hindu were
taking the initiative, the surmise was that the poet was
the editor of a daily — but not from The Manchester Guardian
or the London Times. That was all that even the most wellinformed
among us knew.
At last, around four in the afternoon, the poet (or the
editor) arrived. He was a tall man, very English, very serious
and of course very unknown to all of us. Battling with half
a dozen pedestal fans on the shooting stage, The Boss read
out a long speech. It was obvious
that he too knew precious little
about the poet (or the editor). The
speech was all in the most general
terms but here and there it was
peppered with words like ‘freedom’
and ‘democracy’. Then the poet
spoke. He couldn’t have addressed a
more dazed and silent audience —
no one knew what he was talking
about and his accent defeated any
attempt to understand what he was
saying. The whole thing lasted about
an hour; then the poet left and we
all dispersed in utter bafflement —
what are we doing? What is an
English poet doing in a film studio
which makes Tamil films for the
simplest sort of people? People whose
lives least afforded them the
possibility of cultivating a taste for English poetry? The poet
looked pretty baffled too, for he too must have felt the sheer
incongruity of his talk about the thrills and travails of an English
poet. His visit remained an unexplained mystery.
The great prose-writers of the world may not admit it,
but my conviction grows stronger day after day that prosewriting
is not and cannot be the true pursuit of a genius.
It is for the patient, persistent, persevering drudge with a
heart so shrunken that nothing can break it; rejection
slips don’t mean a thing to him; he at once sets about
making a fresh copy of the long prose piece and sends it on
to another editor enclosing postage for the return of the
manuscript. It was for such people that The Hindu had
published a tiny announcement in an insignificant corner
of an unimportant page — a short story contest organised
by a British periodical by the name The Encounter. Of course,
The Encounter wasn’t a known commodity among the Gemini
literati. I wanted to get an idea of the periodical before I
spent a considerable sum in postage sending a manuscript
to England. In those days, the British Council Library had
an entrance with no long winded signboards and notices to
make you feel you were sneaking into a forbidden area.
And there were copies of The Encounter lying about in
various degrees of freshness, almost untouched by readers.
When I read the editor’s name, I heard a bell ringing in my
shrunken heart. It was the poet who had visited the Gemini
Studios — I felt like I had found a long lost brother and I
sang as I sealed the envelope and wrote out his address. I
felt that he too would be singing the same song at the
same time — long lost brothers of Indian films discover
each other by singing the same song in the first reel
and in the final reel of the film. Stephen Spender5.
Stephen — that was his name.
And years later, when I was out of Gemini Studios and
I had much time but not much money, anything at a
reduced price attracted my attention. On the footpath in
front of the Madras Mount Road Post Office, there was a
pile of brand new books for fifty paise each. Actually they
were copies of the same book, an elegant paperback of
American origin. ‘Special low-priced student edition, in
connection with the 50th Anniversary of the Russian
Revolution’, I paid fifty paise and picked up a copy of the
book, The God That Failed. Six
eminent men of letters in six
separate essays described ‘their
journeys into Communism and
their disillusioned return’; Andre
Gide6, Richard Wright7, Ignazio
Silone8, Arthur Koestler9, Louis
Fischer10 and Stephen Spender.
Stephen Spender! Suddenly the
book assumed tremendous
significance. Stephen Spender, the poet who had visited
Gemini Studios! In a moment I felt a dark chamber of my
mind lit up by a hazy illumination. The reaction to Stephen
Spender at Gemini Studios was no longer a mystery. The
Boss of the Gemini Studios may not have much to do with
Spender’s poetry. But not with his god that failed.;

The Interview

Part I
Since its invention a little over 130 years ago, the interview
has become a commonplace of journalism. Today, almost
everybody who is literate will have read an interview at
some point in their lives, while from the other point of
view, several thousand celebrities have been interviewed
over the years, some of them repeatedly. So it is hardly
surprising that opinions of the interview — of its functions,
methods and merits — vary considerably. Some might make
quite extravagant claims for it as being, in its highest form,
a source of truth, and, in its practice, an art. Others,
usually celebrities who see themselves as its victims, might
despise the interview as an unwarranted intrusion into
their lives, or feel that it somehow diminishes them, just
as in some primitive cultures it is believed that if one
takes a photographic portrait of somebody then one is
stealing that person’s soul. V. S. Naipaul1 ‘feels that some
people are wounded by interviews and lose a part of
themselves,’ Lewis Carroll, the creator of Alice in
Wonderland, was said to have had ‘a just horror of the
interviewer’ and he never consented to be interviewed — It
was his horror of being lionized which made him thus repel
would be acquaintances, interviewers, and the persistent
petitioners for his autograph and he would afterwards
relate the stories of his success in silencing all such people
with much satisfaction and amusement. Rudyard Kipling2
expressed an even more condemnatory attitude towards
the interviewer. His wife, Caroline, writes in her diary for
14 October 1892 that their day was ‘wrecked by two reporters
from Boston’. She reports her husband as saying to the
reporters, “Why do I refuse to be interviewed? Because it
is immoral! It is a crime, just as much of a crime as an
offence against my person, as an assault, and just as much
merits punishment. It is cowardly and vile. No respectable
man would ask it, much less give it,” Yet Kipling had
himself perpetrated such an ‘assault’ on Mark Twain only
a few years before. H. G. Wells3 in an interview in 1894
referred to ‘the interviewing
ordeal’, but was a fairly frequent
interviewee and forty years later
found himself interviewing
Joseph Stalin4. Saul Bellow5, who
has consented to be interviewed
on several occasions, nevertheless
once described interviews as
being like thumbprints on his
windpipe. Yet despite the
drawbacks of the interview, it is
a supremely serviceable medium
of communication. “These days,
more than at any other time,
our most vivid impressions of
our contemporaries are through
was his horror of being lionized which made him thus repel
would be acquaintances, interviewers, and the persistent
petitioners for his autograph and he would afterwards
relate the stories of his success in silencing all such people
with much satisfaction and amusement. Rudyard Kipling2
expressed an even more condemnatory attitude towards
the interviewer. His wife, Caroline, writes in her diary for
14 October 1892 that their day was ‘wrecked by two reporters
from Boston’. She reports her husband as saying to the
reporters, “Why do I refuse to be interviewed? Because it
is immoral! It is a crime, just as much of a crime as an
offence against my person, as an assault, and just as much
merits punishment. It is cowardly and vile. No respectable
man would ask it, much less give it,” Yet Kipling had
himself perpetrated such an ‘assault’ on Mark Twain only
a few years before. H. G. Wells3 in an interview in 1894
referred to ‘the interviewing
ordeal’, but was a fairly frequent
interviewee and forty years later
found himself interviewing
Joseph Stalin4. Saul Bellow5, who
has consented to be interviewed
on several occasions, nevertheless
once described interviews as
being like thumbprints on his
windpipe. Yet despite the
drawbacks of the interview, it is
a supremely serviceable medium
of communication. “These days,
more than at any other time,
our most vivid impressions of
our contemporaries are through
interviews,” Denis Brian has written. “Almost everything
of moment reaches us through one man asking questions
of another. Because of this, the interviewer holds a position
of unprecedented power and influence.”

Part II
“I am a professor who writes novels on Sundays” –Umberto Eco
The following is an extract from an interview of Umberto
Eco. The interviewer is Mukund Padmanabhan from
The Hindu. Umberto Eco, a professor at the University
of Bologna in Italy had already acquired a formidable
reputation as a scholar for his ideas on semiotics (the
study of signs), literary interpretation, and medieval
aesthetics before he turned to writing fiction. Literary
fiction, academic texts, essays, children’s books,
newspaper articles—his written output is staggeringly
large and wide-ranging, In 1980, he acquired the
equivalent of intellectual superstardom with the
publication of The Name of the Rose, which sold more
than 10 million copies.
Mukund: The English novelist and academic David Lodge
once remarked, “I can’t understand how one man
can do all the things he [Eco] does.”
Umberto Eco: Maybe I give the impression of doing many
things. But in the end, I am convinced I am always
doing the same thing.
Mukund: Which is?
Umberto Eco: Aah, now that is more difficult to explain.
I have some philosophical interests and I pursue
them through my academic work and my novels.
Even my books for children are about non-violence
and peace...you see, the same bunch of ethical,
philosophical interests.
And then I have a secret. Did you know what will
happen if you eliminate the empty spaces from the
universe, eliminate the empty spaces in all the
atoms? The universe will become as big as my fist.
Similarly, we have a lot of empty spaces in our
lives. I call them interstices. Say you are coming
over to my place. You are in an elevator and while
you are coming up, I am waiting for you. This is an
interstice, an empty space. I work in empty spaces.
While waiting for your elevator to come up from
the first to the third floor, I have already written
an article! (Laughs).
Mukund: Not everyone can do that of course. Your
non-fictional writing, your scholarly work has a
certain playful and personal quality about it. It is
a marked departure from a regular academic
style — which is invariably depersonalised and
often dry and boring. Have you consciously adopted
an informal approach or is it something that just
came naturally to you?
Umberto Eco: When I presented my first Doctoral
dissertation in Italy, one of the Professors said,
“Scholars learn a lot of a certain subject, then they
make a lot of false hypotheses, then they correct them
and at the end, they put the conclusions. You, on the
contrary, told the story of your research. Even including
your trials and errors.” At the same time, he recognised
I was right and went on to publish my dissertation as
a book, which meant he appreciated it.
At that point, at the age of 22, I understood
scholarly books should be written the way I had
done — by telling the story of the research. This is
why my essays always have a narrative aspect.
And this is why probably I started writing narratives
[novels] so late — at the age of 50, more or less.
I remember that my dear friend Roland Barthes
was always frustrated that he was an essayist and
not a novelist. He wanted to do creative writing
one day or another but he died before he could do
so. I never felt this kind of frustration. I started
writing novels by accident. I had nothing to do one
day and so I started. Novels probably satisfied my
taste for narration.
Mukund: Talking about novels, from being a famous
academic you went on to becoming spectacularly
famous after the publication of The Name of the
Rose. You’ve written five novels against many more
scholarly works of non-fiction, at least more than
20 of them...
Umberto Eco: Over 40.
Mukund: Over 40! Among them a seminal piece of work
on semiotics. But ask most people about Umberto
Eco and they will say, “Oh, he’s the novelist.” Does
that bother you?
Umberto Eco: Yes. Because I consider myself a
university professor who writes novels on Sundays.
It’s not a joke. I participate in academic conferences
and not meetings of Pen Clubs and writers. I
identify myself with the academic community.
But okay, if they [most people] have read only the
novels... (laughs and shrugs). I know that by writing
novels, I reach a larger audience. I cannot expect
to have one million readers with stuff on semiotics.
Mukund: Which brings me to my next question. The
Name of the Rose is a very serious novel. It’s a
detective yarn at one level but it also delves into
metaphysics, theology, and medieval history. Yet
it enjoyed a huge mass audience. Were you puzzled
at all by this?
Umberto Eco: No. Journalists are puzzled. And
sometimes publishers. And this is because
journalists and publishers believe that people like
trash and don’t like difficult reading experiences.
Consider there are six billion people on this planet.
The Name of the Rose sold between 10 and 15
million copies. So in a way I reached only a small
percentage of readers. But it is exactly these kinds
of readers who don’t want easy experiences. Or at
least don’t always want this. I myself, at 9 pm after
dinner, watch television and want to see either
‘Miami Vice’ or ‘Emergency Room’. I enjoy it and I
need it. But not all day.
Mukund: Could the huge success of the novel have
anything to do with the fact that it dealt with a
period of medieval history that...
Umberto Eco: That’s possible. But let me tell you
another story, because I often tell stories like a
Chinese wise man. My American publisher said
while she loved my book, she didn’t expect to sell
more than 3,000 copies in a country where nobody
has seen a cathedral or studies Latin. So I was
given an advance for 3,000 copies, but in the end
it sold two or three million in the U.S.
A lot of books have been written about the medieval
past far before mine. I think the success of the
book is a mystery. Nobody can predict it. I think if
I had written The Name of the Rose ten years earlier
or ten years later, it wouldn’t have been the same.
Why it worked at that time is a mystery.;

Going Places
“When I leave,” Sophie said, coming home from school,
“I’m going to have a boutique.”
Jansie, linking arms with her along the street; looked
doubtful.
“Takes money, Soaf, something like that.”
“I’ll find it,” Sophie said, staring far down the street.
“Take you a long time to save that much.”
“Well I’ll be a manager then — yes, of course — to begin
with. Till I’ve got enough. But anyway, I know just how it’s
all going to look.”
“They wouldn’t make you manager straight off, Soaf.”
“I’ll be like Mary Quant,” Sophie said. “I’ll be a natural.
They’ll see it from the start. I’ll have the most amazing
shop this city’s ever seen.’”
Jansie, knowing they were both earmarked for the
biscuit factory, became melancholy. She wished Sophie
wouldn’t say these things.
When they reached Sophie’s street Jansie said, “It’s
only a few months away now, Soaf, you really should be
sensible. They don’t pay well for shop work, you know that,
your dad would never allow it.”
“Or an actress. Now there’s real money in that. Yes,
and I could maybe have the boutique on the side. Actresses
don’t work full time, do they? Anyway, that or a fashion
designer, you know — something a bit sophisticated”.
And she turned in through the open street door leaving
Jansie standing in the rain.
“If ever I come into money I’ll buy a boutique.”
“Huh - if you ever come into money... if you ever come
into money you’ll buy us a blessed decent house to live in,
thank you very much.”
Sophie’s father was scooping shepherd’s pie into his
mouth as hard as he could go, his plump face still grimy
and sweat — marked from the day.
“She thinks money grows on trees, don’t she, Dad?’
said little Derek, hanging on the back of his father’s chair.
Their mother sighed.
Sophie watched her back stooped over the sink and
wondered at the incongruity of the delicate bow which
fastened her apron strings. The delicate-seeming bow and
the crooked back. The evening had already blacked in the
windows and the small room was steamy from the stove
and cluttered with the heavy-breathing man in his vest at
the table and the dirty washing piled up in the corner.
Sophie felt a tightening in her throat. She went to look for
her brother Geoff.
He was kneeling on the floor in the next room tinkering
with a part of his motorcycle over some newspaper spread
on the carpet. He was three years out of school, an
apprentice mechanic, travelling to his work each day to the
far side of the city. He was almost grown up now, and she
suspected areas of his life about which she knew nothing,
about which he never spoke. He said little at all, ever,
voluntarily. Words had to be prized out of him like stones
out of the ground. And she was jealous of his silence. When
he wasn’t speaking it was as though he was away
somewhere, out there in the world in those places she had
never been. Whether they were only the outlying districts
of the city, or places beyond in the surrounding country —
who knew? — they attained a special fascination simply
because they were unknown to her and remained out of
her reach.
Perhaps there were also people, exotic, interesting
people of whom he never spoke — it was possible, though
he was quiet and didn’t make new friends easily. She
longed to know them. She wished she could be admitted
more deeply into her brother’s
affections and that someday he
might take her with him. Though
their father forbade it and Geoff
had never expressed an opinion,
she knew he thought her too
young. And she was impatient.
She was conscious of a vast world
out there waiting for her and she
knew instinctively that she would
feel as at home there as in the
city which had always been her home. It expectantly awaited
her arrival. She saw herself riding there behind Geoff. He
wore new, shining black leathers and she a yellow dress
with a kind of cape that flew out behind. There was the
sound of applause as the world rose to greet them.
He sat frowning at the oily component he cradled in
his hands, as though it were a small dumb animal and he
was willing it to speak.
“I met Danny Casey,” Sophie said.
He looked around abruptly. “Where?”
“In the arcade — funnily enough.”
“It’s never true.”
“I did too.”
“You told Dad?”
She shook her head, chastened at his unawareness
that he was always the first to share her secrets.
“I don’t believe it.”
“There I was looking at the clothes in Royce’s window
when someone came and stood beside me, and I looked
around and who should it be but Danny Casey.”
“All right, what does he look like?”
“Oh come on, you know what he looks like.”
“Close to, I mean.”
“Well — he has green eyes. Gentle eyes. And he’s not
so tall as you’d think...” She wondered if she should say
about his teeth, but decided against it.
Their father had washed when he came in and his
face and arms were shiny and pink and he smelled of soap.
He switched on the television, tossed one of little Derek’s
shoes from his chair onto the sofa, and sat down with a
grunt.
“Sophie met Danny Casey,” Geoff said.
Sophie wriggled where she was sitting at the table.
Her father turned his head on his thick neck to look at
her. His expression was one of disdain.
“It’s true,” Geoff said.
“I once knew a man who had known Tom Finney,” his
father said reverently to the television. “But that was a
long time ago.”
“You told us,” Geoff said.
“Casey might be that good some day.”
“Better than that even. He’s the best.”
“If he keeps his head on his shoulders. If they look
after him properly. A lot of distractions for a youngster in
the game these days.”
“He’ll be all right. He’s with the best team in the
country.”
“He’s very young yet.”
“He’s older than I am.”
“Too young really for the first team.”
“You can’t argue with that sort of ability.”
“He’s going to buy a shop,” Sophie said from the table.
Her father grimaced. “Where’d you hear that?”
“He told me so.”
He muttered something inaudible and dragged himself
round in his chair. “This another of your wild stories?”
“She met him in the arcade,” Geoff said, and told him
how it had been.
“One of these days you’re going to talk yourself into a
load of trouble,” her father said aggressively.
“Geoff knows it’s true, don’t you Geoff?”
“He don’t believe you-though he’d like to.”
* * *
The table lamp cast an amber glow across her brother’s
bedroom wall, and across the large poster of United’s first
team squad and the row of coloured photographs beneath,
three of them of the young Irish prodigy, Casey.
“Promise you’ll tell no-one?” Sophie said.
“Nothing to tell is there?”
“Promise, Geoff — Dad’d murder me.”
“Only if he thought it was true.”
“Please, Geoff.”
“Christ, Sophie, you’re still at school. Casey must have
strings of girls.”
“No he doesn’t.”
“How could you know that?” he jeered.
“He told me, that’s how.”
“As if anyone would tell a girl something like that.”
“Yes he did. He isn’t like that. He’s... quiet.”
“Not as quiet as all that — apparently.”
“It was nothing like that, Geoff — it was me spoke
first. When I saw who it was, I said, “Excuse me, but aren’t
you Danny Casey?” And he looked
sort of surprised. And he said,
“Yes, that’s right.” And I knew it
must be him because he had the
accent, you know, like when they
interviewed him on the television.
So I asked him for an autograph
for little Derek, but neither of us
had any paper or a pen. So then
we just talked a bit. About the
clothes in Royce’s window. He
seemed lonely. After all, it’s a long
way from the west of Ireland. And
then, just as he was going, he
said, if I would care to meet him
next week he would give me an autograph then. Of course,
I said I would.”
“As if he’d ever show up.”
“You do believe me now, don’t you?”
He dragged his jacket, which was shiny and shapeless,
from the back of the chair and pushed his arms into it. She
wished he paid more attention to his appearance. Wished
he cared more about clothes. He was tall with a strong
dark face. Handsome, she thought.
“It’s the unlikeliest thing I ever heard,” he said.
* * *
On Saturday they made their weekly pilgrimage to
watch United. Sophie and her father and little Derek went
down near the goal — Geoff, as always, went with his
mates higher up. United won two-nil and Casey drove in
the second goal, a blend of innocence and Irish genius,
going round the two big defenders on the edge of the penalty
area, with her father screaming for him to pass, and beating
the hesitant goalkeeper from a dozen yards. Sophie glowed
with pride. Afterwards Geoff was ecstatic.
“I wish he was an Englishman,” someone said on the bus.
“Ireland’ll win the World Cup,” little Derek told his
mother when Sophie brought him home. Her father was
gone to the pub to celebrate.
“What’s this you’ve been telling?” Jansie said, next
week.
“About what?”
“Your Geoff told our Frank you met Danny Casey.”
This wasn’t an inquisition, just Jansie being nosey.
But Sophie was startled.
“Oh, that.”
Jansie frowned, sensing she was covering. “Yes — that.”
“Well-yes, I did.”
“You never did?” Jansie exclaimed.
Sophie glared at the ground. Damn that Geoff, this
was a Geoff thing not a Jansie thing. It was meant to be
something special just between them. Something secret.
It wasn’t a Jansie kind of thing at all. Tell gawky Jansie
something like that and the whole neighbourhood would
get to know it. Damn that Geoff, was nothing sacred?
“It’s a secret — meant to be.”
“I’ll keep a secret, Soaf, you know that.”
“I wasn’t going to tell anyone. There’ll be a right old
row if my dad gets to hear about it.”
Jansie blinked. “A row? I’d have thought he’d be chuffed
as anything.”
She realised then that Jansie didn’t know about the
date bit — Geoff hadn’t told about that. She breathed more
easily. So Geoff hadn’t let her down after all. He believed
in her after all. After all some things might be sacred.
“It was just a little thing really. I asked him for an
autograph, but we hadn’t any paper or a pen so it was no
good.” How much had Geoff said?
“Jesus, I wish I’d have been there.”
“Of course, my dad didn’t want to believe it. You know
what a misery he is. But the last thing I need is queues of
people round our house asking him, “What’s all this about
Danny Casey?” He’d murder me. And you know how my
mum gets when there’s a row.”
Jansie said, hushed, “You can trust me, Soaf, you know
that.”
* * *
After dark she walked by the canal, along a sheltered
path lighted only by the glare of the lamps from the wharf
across the water, and the unceasing drone of the city was
muffled and distant. It was a place she had often played in
when she was a child. There was a wooden bench beneath
a solitary elm where lovers sometimes came. She sat down
to wait. It was the perfect place, she had always thought
so, for a meeting of this kind. For those who wished not to
be observed. She knew he would approve.
For some while, waiting, she imagined his coming. She
watched along the canal, seeing him come out of the
shadows, imagining her own consequent excitement. Not
until some time had elapsed did she begin balancing against
this the idea of his not coming.
Here I sit, she said to herself, wishing Danny would
come, wishing he would come and sensing the time passing.
I feel the pangs of doubt stirring inside me. I watch for him
but still there is no sign of him. I remember Geoff saying
he would never come, and how none of them believed me
when I told them. I wonder what will I do, what can I tell
them now if he doesn’t come? But we know how it was,
Danny and me — that’s the main thing. How can you help
what people choose to believe? But all the same, it makes
me despondent, this knowing I’ll never be able to show
them they’re wrong to doubt me.
She waited, measuring in this way the changes taking
place in her. Resignation was no sudden thing.
Now I have become sad, she thought. And it is a hard
burden to carry, this sadness. Sitting here waiting and
knowing he will not come I can see the future and how I
will have to live with this burden. They of course will doubt
me, as they always doubted me, but I will have to hold up
my head remembering how it was. Already I envisage the
slow walk home, and Geoff’s disappointed face when I tell
him, “He didn’t come, that Danny.” And then he’ll fly out
and slam the door. “But we know how it was,” I shall tell
myself, “Danny and me.” It is a hard thing, this sadness.
She climbed the crumbling steps to the street. Outside
the pub she passed her father’s bicycle propped against
the wall, and was glad. He would not be there when she got
home.
“Excuse me, but aren’t you Danny Casey?”
Coming through the arcade she pictured him again
outside Royce’s.
He turns, reddening slightly. “Yes, that’s right.”
“I watch you every week, with my dad and my brothers.
We think you’re great.”
“Oh, well now — that’s very nice.”
“I wonder — would you mind signing an autograph?”
His eyes are on the same level as your own. His nose is
freckled and turns upwards slightly, and when he smiles
he does so shyly, exposing teeth with gaps between. His
eyes are green, and when he looks straight at you they
seem to shimmer. They seem gentle, almost afraid. Like a
gazelle’s. And you look away. You
let his eyes run over you a little.
And then you come back to find
them, slightly breathless.
And he says, “I don’t seem to
have a pen at all.”
You realise you haven’t either.
“My brothers will be very
sorry,” you say.
And afterwards you wait
there alone in the arcade for a
long while, standing where he
stood, remembering the soft melodious voice, the shimmer
of green eyes. No taller than you. No bolder than you. The
prodigy. The innocent genius. The great Danny Casey.
And she saw it all again, last Saturday — saw him
ghost past the lumbering defenders, heard the fifty
thousand catch their breath as he hovered momentarily
over the ball, and then the explosion of sound as he struck
it crisply into the goal, the sudden thunderous eruption of
exultant approbation.;
____________________________________________________________________XII-II


}
Excercises: {

}
}